---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in Sheffield: Sky Betting and Gaming'
description: 'Betting on Clojure'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPostClojureIn.astro'
publishedDate: '2017-03-16'
heroImage: 'sky-betting-gaming-logo.jpg'
clojureIn:
  {
    season: 'one',
    industry: 'media & telecommunications',
    quote: '"Ostensibly Clojure is a practical language."'
  }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

# International Betting

import sb from '../../assets/blog/skybetteam.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sb} />

[Sky Betting and Gaming](https://www.skybet.com) is a gambling company
that is entirely online. They run a UK operation from Leeds and an
international operation from Sheffield, started as a greenfields project
two years ago.

They are ranked in the [Sunday Times top 100 best places to
work](http://appointments.thesundaytimes.co.uk/article/best100companies/)
in 2016 and again in 2017.

I chatted with Principal Software Engineers [Ed
Bowler](https://twitter.com/l0st3d) and [Paul
Brabban](https://twitter.com/brabster) to understand this Clojure
adoption story.

# Background

_Jon:_ Could you give me an overview of the project?

_Ed_: Sky Betting and Gaming recently decided to expand from the UK into
international markets. The international arm started in Sheffield so as
to not distract from the incredibly successful UK operation, based in
Leeds.

_Paul_: We went live in Italy last year and we're seeing even better
growth than we hoped. We're all really happy with an increasing share of
the market there and our mobile app shot to the top bookmaker spot
within weeks!

_Ed:_ We have about 1,100 people now across all of Sky Betting and
Gaming. There's around 50 of us in Sheffield for the International
Tribe. The tech comprises mainly Clojure, Scala, Java, Node.js, and
React.js on the front end.

The Clojure aspect is our team. The teams here are divided up by
function, for example we have a sportsbook team, a casino game team, an
accounts team, and ours, a data team.

It's a nice place to work because we have the freedom to choose the
technology we use and we have autonomy within teams.

import sep from '../../assets/blog/skybet-ed-paul.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sep} />

# Clojure Journey

_Jon:_ How did Clojure get started at Sky Betting and Gaming?

_Ed_: When I started I was given the remit of working out how to
generate financial reports and to do it in a serverless way. Having used
Clojure in the past, I picked Clojure for building a proof of concept.
We needed a low impact way of generating reports; integrating with 3rd
parties such as CRM systems, marketing systems, and real time analytics.

We picked [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda) to crunch the data
and to output it to [Amazon RDS](https://aws.amazon.com/rds). We took an
[Event Sourcing](https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html)
approach; as we developed the platform we collected as much data as we
could and figured out how to report on it later.

_Jon:_ What was your journey to Clojure before Sky Betting and Gaming?

_Ed_: My road to Lisp started in 2007 using Common Lisp. In 2009 I
discovered Clojure and in 2010 I created a startup that actually used
Clojure. We went for five years until we ran out of money.

I joined Sky Betting and Gaming as a Principal Java developer, and I've
since written just 5 lines of Java.

_Jon:_ How has Clojure been received?

_Ed_: 99% of people are interested and looking around. A good number of
those are really interested and are picking it up and learning it. Some
Microservices have been started outside the team.

The people I've forced to use Clojure have picked it up incredibly well.

import st from '../../assets/blog/skybetit.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={st} />

_Jon:_ Is it a matter of time before the whole ship becomes Clojure?

_Ed:_ If I had my way!

We started an FP guild following the [the spotify
model](http://blog.crisp.se/2012/11/14/henrikkniberg/scaling-agile-at-spotify)
of cross cutting _guilds_. Every fortnight there's an hour long guild
meetup with cake (I've put on a stone). I started the guild to spread
the idea and to get the good news out.

We played with [4Clojure](https://www.4clojure.com/) and talked about
concepts of the Clojure language.

# IDES

_Jon:_ What IDEs do you use?

_Paul:_ Emacs.

_Ed:_ I've been using Emacs since 1999. Even when I was using Java I was
using Emacs.

We have about a few Clojure developers. Two are using Emacs, one is
using Cursive, and another is using [Proto-Repl with
Atom](https://atom.io/packages/proto-repl).

# Hiring

_Jon:_ Do you worry about being able to hire in Sheffield?

_Ed:_ You need people that are [smart and get things
done](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Smart-Gets-Things-Done-Technical/dp/1590598385).

All languages have pluses and minuses. With Clojure you need to get past
the brackets, which should take about an hour. Any smart person can pick
it up, especially if they are guided. Paul had a 2-3 month gap before
joining; in his own time he picked up Emacs and Clojure in one go and
became immediately productive. This was seriously impressive and it
vindicated the whole approach. Pick up smart people up and they will
learn this stuff.

_Paul:_ I did Java for a few years. After that, I worked with a team to
rewrite a Java monolith over to NodeJS microservices in a fairly
functional style. When I interviewed here I'd had fun with a couple of
functional languages and been through the [SICP
book](https://mitpress.mit.edu/sites/default/files/sicp/full-text/book/book.html).
The opportunity to try something completely different with a Lisp that
was properly functional was too big an opportunity for me to miss.

# Lambdas:

_Jon:_ What is your stack?

_Paul:_ AWS. The majority of our code runs on [AWS
Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/). We originally had a single
large repository, but we've been breaking it down and extending it into
lots of small code repos. The downside to Clojure is that each Lambda
Function ships with several megabytes of the JVM Clojure runtime as well
as the AWS SDK. That gives us quite slow cold startup times.

_Jon:_ Have you looked at ClojureScript for Lambda?

_Ed_: Not initially as I had more experience with the JVM and more
confidence with it. However relatively large artifacts mean the startup
and deployment times do have an impact. Recently we have started trying
to use ClojureScript for a faster startup.

Our Lambdas tend to stay running; polling and chewing through records.
The startup times are much less of an issue than they might be in, say,
an API endpoint.

_Paul:_ We typically have [Kinesis](https://aws.amazon.com/kinesis)
queues in front of the Lambdas, which is essentially a simplified,
hosted [Kafka](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_Kafka).

_Jon:_ How do you provision the Lambdas?

_Paul_: We use [AWS
CloudFormation](https://aws.amazon.com/cloudformation) - we build them
with Clojure using [Crucible](https://github.com/brabster/crucible) and
use Spec to validate. Our Continuous Delivery pipeline then provisions
using the templates. We've made over 600 deployments since we started
using [Travis](https://travis-ci.com/) last summer.

# Tech shout out

_Jon:_ What technologies / libraries do you use?

_Ed:_ We use [Amazonica](https://github.com/mcohen01/amazonica) quite a
bit; it makes it so fast to get up and running with the AWS tech.

_Paul:_ The Amazonica maintainer, [Michael
Cohen](https://github.com/mcohen01) is really responsive and super on
the ball.

_Ed:_ We use [Cheshire](https://github.com/dakrone/cheshire) for JSON
fast parsing, [HTTP kit](http://www.http-kit.org/) the client library is
useful for neat handling of async invocation and connection pooling.

_Paul:_ [Leiningen](https://leiningen.org/) and a private Travis CI
subscription for builds. We just introduced scheduled builds using
Travis\' new feature to run dependency-related checks. The folks
maintaining
[lein-dependency-check](https://github.com/livingsocial/lein-dependency-check)
took some PRs to bring it up to date, and of course
[lein-ancient](https://github.com/xsc/lein-ancient).

_Ed:_ - Clojure.test and
[Timbre](https://github.com/ptaoussanis/timbre).

[Spec](https://clojure.org/about/spec) is worth a mention. We've seen
what Spec has to offer, but it will take a while before we know how to
effectively use it.

# Clojure

_Jon:_ Is Clojure giving you actual business value, rather than just
adding the cool factor?

_Ed:_ Data processing is what it's all about. With Clojure we're already
a level up. [Paul Graham talks about building the language and
API](http://paulgraham.com/progbot.html) up to the business. At Sky
Betting and Gaming we are getting there but we're not that far along;
it's been an interesting journey to take.

The benefits to the business are that we have a very small team being
very productive. We have one of the best burn-down rates. You could
maybe argue that the people are just superstars, but you could also
point to the tech. It's a combination of good people and good tech.

_Paul:_ There are three developers on the data tech side, and a testing
specialist who's taking the chance to learn Clojure for test automation
too. The team would have made it work whatever... it's a pros and cons
thing. The choice to use Clojure makes us very attractive to other
developers; we are getting a lot of interest from people with an
interest in Functional Programming which is potentially useful.

_Ed:_ Ostensibly Clojure is a practical language and is all about
getting stuff done.

_Paul_ It's very quick to get things up and moving, especially when I
think back to what I was doing with Java.

_Ed:_ The means to abstraction are more flexible in Clojure. You can
keep the domain logic separate from the operational aspects such as
handling errors etc. You get this separation far easier than in a
language like Java where you have objects.

_Paul:_ In Clojure I can get on with solving the business problem and
then add the safety features in afterwards. Clojure is very tolerant of
change compared with other languages that demand a strict contract. I
was only discussing that with a colleague earlier this week!

_Ed:_ This is exactly what Spec is designed for; qualifying only the
data that we care about.

_Paul:_ With Clojure on the JVM we have rock solid reliability and code
that is easy to understand.

# Training

_Jon:_ How you found training?

_Paul:_ There's a learning curve, especially for those just with a
background in Java or JavaScript, for example. Once the necessary skills
are learnt though it does pay off nicely.

_Ed:_ You get a lot with Clojure. You have a bag of solutions and it's
your job to cross the gap of knowing how to apply those tools and to
apply the learning.

import skl from '../../assets/blog/skybetlogo.png'

<Image alt='image' src={skl} />

# Last things

_Jon:_ Any last words?

_Ed:_ The company is always looking out for talent, [wanting to recruit
good people](https://skybetcareers.com).

_Paul:_ I've found the [Clojurians Slack](https://clojurians.slack.com)
invaluable for helping me out and sharing the Clojure philosophy. Having
easy access to people like [Alex
Miller](http://puredanger.github.io/tech.puredanger.com/) is really
helpful!

_Ed:_ There is _[(def shef)](https://defshef.github.io/)_, a monthly
Sheffield functional programming meetup. Clojure has featured a number
of times.
