---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in Oslo: Telenor Digital'
description: 'Communicating with Clojure'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPostClojureIn.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-12-09'
heroImage: 'telenor-logo.jpg'
clojureIn:
  {
    season: 'one',
    industry: 'media & telecommunications',
    quote: '"The overall effect Clojure has had on me is that I have been rejuvenated."'
  }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

# A communications giant

import tt from '../../assets/blog/telenor-team.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={tt} />

[Telenor](https://www.telenor.com/) is a telecommunications company
providing services in 13 different countries serving over 200 million
customers worldwide. The company has over 35K employees and uses a
wealth of different technologies including Clojure.

To learn more I caught up with tech lead [Joel
Wilsson](https://twitter.com/joelwilsson), software developer [Paul
Salaberria](https://github.com/psalaberria002) and recent hire senior
developer [Erik Assum](https://twitter.com/slipset).

# Background

_Jon:_ So what do you three do at Telenor?

_Joel:_ We work for [Telenor Digital](http://www.telenordigital.com/)
providing a global back-end and digital services for telcos in the
Telenor Group. We have about 300 engineers and provide services such as
CONNECT Payment and CONNECT ID - payment and login solutions.

_Jon:_ What's it like to work at Telenor Digital?

_Joel:_ It's a super international company; it's a Norwegian company but
less than 50% of the employees are Norwegian.

_Erik:_ It feels like a new angle on diversity. There are no
_foreigners_ here, everyone speaks English. It's a really cool
experience.

_Joel:_ Our in-house development teams have a real start-up culture, for
instance we sometimes start new services such as
[appear.in](https://appear.in).

import ai from '../../assets/blog/appearin.png'

<Image alt='image' src={ai} />

_Jon:_ Cool, you guys built appear.in? (We were using appear.in to
facilitate this interview).

_Erik:_ Yes. [appear.in](https://appear.in) was invented here and not
made to order. It was launched without asking for permission which
showcases some of the spirit inside of Telenor digital.

_Joel:_ In our team - the Data Insights team - we report on how all our
various products are performing. Everything we build now uses Clojure
and maybe ClojureScript.

We're a team of 12 in Digital Global Services of Telenor Digital. The
other teams here mostly use Java, but there are a few using different
languages such as Go and Node.js. We're the only ones using Clojure.

import tdl from '../../assets/blog/telenor-digital-logo.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={tdl} />

# The Clojure journey

_Jon:_ How did the Clojure journey start at Telenor?

_Joel:_ It started with some consultants here being interested in using
Clojure and they got the go ahead. It started like how it does at so
many other places; using it for small independent pieces; small
utilities such as data import/processing jobs.

It has increased since then; when new services or rewrites happen we use
Clojure. By now our team has only one Java left service in production;
everything else is written in Clojure.

_Jon:_ When did you yourselves start using it?

_Joel:_ I joined Telenor Digital because of Clojure. I did search for
Clojure on [Stackoverflow jobs](http://stackoverflow.com/jobs) and I
found this job.

_Jon:_ What got you originally into Clojure?

_Joel:_ I've been interested in programming languages for a long time
having tried everything from Ruby, OCaml, Standard ML, Common Lisp, C
and C++, Java, and eventually Clojure.

I wanted to get back to Lisp but Common Lisp felt stagnant, with no
leadership or clear path to improve the situation (for example, by
standardizing on a single syntax for hash-maps), and there wasn't an
awesome story on how to manage projects and dependencies, although this
has improved since. I also wanted a language with a good story for
multi-threading, which wasn't possible to do in a portable way across
implementations and operating systems.

Clojure gets that for free through the JVM, and the persistent data
structures brought something new with just the right amount of
additional syntax for my liking.

import tdt from '../../assets/blog/telenordallteam.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={tdt} />

_Jon:_ How do other teams perceive your teams\' use of Clojure?

_Erik:_ There is a big step from curiosity about Clojure to actually
starting using it. If you're using JavaScript and you want to try React,
then you just try it. But Clojure is a different ecosystem; a different
editor for example. There is a lot of perceived difficultly in getting
started.

_Joel:_ Most of the teams in our division are 100% Java - they like Java
and are a little bit sceptical of Clojure. Some are interested and some
are curious - we are collaborating with another team and they are
starting to make contributions. One person needed some help with the
IDEs etc but he is making changes on his own.

I hope to spread to Clojure within the company. We're doing lots of
hiring and recruitment, inviting people if we have workshops and
training and so on.

# Why Clojure?

_Jon:_ What are the actual advantages of Clojure that you see?

import sl from '../../assets/blog/spark-logo.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sl} />

_Joel:_ So much shorter time to write code. In our team - Data
Insights - there is lots of data processing. It's very useful to have
immutability baked in and being able to parallelise code very easily.

The functional mindset is a requirement for the data processing
frameworks we use such as [Spark](http://spark.apache.org/) and
[Flink](https://flink.apache.org/) where you use functional operations
frequently; map, reduce etc. There is also laziness; not executing
computations until they are absolutely required. Developers need to be
comfortable with laziness to use these frameworks.

_Erik:_ The overall effect Clojure has had on me is that I've been
rejuvenated. I look forward to work each day; looking forward to working
on code - playing with it and making it beautiful which is not possible
in Java the way it is in Clojure.

# Upskilling

import joy from '../../assets/blog/joyofclojure.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={joy} />

_Jon:_ How do you go about upskilling developers to learn Clojure?

_Paul:_ I joined a year ago, before that I worked on the front end using
JavaScript and Java. I hadn't heard of Clojure or Lisp.

I read the [Joy of
Clojure](https://www.manning.com/books/the-joy-of-clojure-second-edition)
and found it really interesting. I was sceptical at first - all the
parens and the syntax. The first week I felt like: _why should I use
this thing?_ I wanted to continue using Angular.js, but Joel convinced
me to use ClojureScript.

_Joel:_ I thought I gave you the choice.

_Paul:_ In a week or two weeks I was loving it; Clojure is a lot of fun
to write. Namespaces make applications really modular, making the code
really easy to maintain.

_Joel:_ It helps that ClojureScript is structured as a real program.

_Paul:_ Yes, with Clojure and ClojureScript it's like working on the
same thing. It was crazy - in a couple of weeks I felt completely
fluent, where as before I'd hated the parens.

_Erik:_ When you onboard people you need to teach them to use the REPL
fluently. They need to understand the way of working in the REPL to reap
the benefits of code becoming easier to play with which ultimately leads
to better code. This isn't immediately evident for people new to
Clojure.

# Hiring

_Jon:_ How do you go about hiring?

_Joel:_ We look for good developers, not necessarily Clojure developers.
We look for people with experience of functional programming and an
interest in learning languages, as opposed to people that just want to
continue with the tools they know.

_Erik:_ As Joel said: he joined this company because of Clojure.

# IDE wars

_Jon:_ What IDE do you use?

_Joel:_ We have two Emacs lovers, one Emacs novice, and four developers
using Cursive.

_Paul:_ I tried Emacs but it was too much work to learn both Emacs and
Clojure at same time. I switched to Intellij and Cursive and it was
amazing. For people that don't want to learn Emacs, try Cursive - they
will love it.

_Erik:_ For each new person that joins we let them learn Clojure first.
If they want to learn Emacs also then fine, but it's harsh to put them
on Emacs and Clojure directly.

I would recommend Emacs though. I've been using Emacs for 26 years and I
love it; I started using it in 1990.

# ClojureScript

_Jon:_ What do you guys use for the front-end?

_Joel:_ We use [Om](https://github.com/omcljs/om) for our front-end. If
I could do over I'd look into Reagent. But Om is nice, it's worked well
for us.

# State of Clojure?

_Jon:_ What's the state of Clojure in Norway?

_Joel:_ - At the last EuroClojure I went to, I met a lot of people from
Oslo. There's a stable community, although it's a bit non-visible.

There's a [functional programming meetup in
Oslo](http://www.meetup.com/Oslo-Socially-Functional/) and a lot of
people are interested in Clojure.

_Jon:_ What's your opinion on the overall state of Clojure?.

_Joel:_ I appreciate the backwards compatibility of Clojure, especially
when compared to Scala which breaks binary compatibility all the time.

_Erik:_ I enjoy the work that [Alex
Miller](https://twitter.com/puredanger) does - he's the face of Clojure
for the community. He has a difficult job; there's a lot of people with
strong opinions and he manages them really well.

What really excites me about Clojure is that it is not very exciting.
It's rock solid and let's you do your job.

_Joel:_ I would said it is exciting but not surprising.

_Jon:_ Any recent developments in the Clojure language or ecosystem that
interest you? Please don't say Spec because everyone does!

![Introduction to Clojure
Spec](/img/lq/103-clojure-spec-with-rich-hickey.jpg)

_Joel:_ What else can I say? Spec! I am also excited about
[Lumo](https://github.com/anmonteiro/lumo) and
[Planck](https://github.com/mfikes/planck), a proper way to potentially
use ClojureScript for actual scripting.

# Frustrations

_Jon:_ Any frustrations with Clojure?

_Joel:_ We could use better error messages. There is room for more
batteries included pre-packaged frameworks, recommended libraries etc.

I've noticed that what you read in books doesn't always match current
best practices. For example what are the best practices for logging? We
have things like [Chestnut](https://github.com/plexus/chestnut) and
[Luminus](http://www.luminusweb.net/), but more official/central
recommendations on best practices and endorsed libraries would be
appreciated.

# Technologies

_Jon:_ What technologies would you like to give a shout-out to?

_Joel:_ We've mentioned [Om](https://github.com/omcljs/om). We like
[Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/) and [Druid](http://druid.io/). In
terms of Clojure, the standard stuff:
[Compojure](https://github.com/weavejester/compojure),
[Ring](https://github.com/ring-clojure),
[Mount](https://github.com/tolitius/mount) which is quite nice.
[HugSQL](https://github.com/layerware/hugsql).
[Claypoole](https://github.com/TheClimateCorporation/claypoole) by the
Climate Corporation, [Amazonica](https://github.com/mcohen01/amazonica).

_Jon:_ What do you think of Mount? I haven't heard of it being used that
often.

_Joel:_ It so easy to get started with and just works. You don't need to
deal with protocols etc. We're very happy with it; Mount feels more
Clojure-ry than Component.

# Resources

Telenor Digital [has a website](http://www.telenordigital.com/) and
[recently started a
podcast](https://soundcloud.com/telenordigitalpodcast/). Joel also
[maintains a blog](https://wjoel.com).
