---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in Athens: Skroutz'
description: 'Comparisons and Clojure'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-11-18'
heroImage: 'skroutz-logo.jpg'
clojureIn: { season: 'one', industry: 'e-commerce' }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

> We don't want a Clojure version of Rails!

import sk from '../../assets/blog/skroutz-team.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sk} />

# Comparing Prices

Skroutz is a Greek ecommerce website used to compare prices of products.
It is the biggest Greek originated website attracting millions of unique
visitors per month. There are now versions of Skroutz running in Turkey
and in the UK [(scrooge.co.uk)](https://www.scrooge.co.uk/).

Skroutz started ten years ago and now has 150 employees with 20 based in
Istanbul. They are predominately a Ruby on Rails company but they have
started using different technologies such as Clojure.

I caught up with development team leads [Nikos
Fertakis](https://twitter.com/nikosfertakis) and [Giorgos
Tsiftsis](https://twitter.com/giorgostsiftsis) for a pleasant
conversation.

# Adopting Clojure

_Jon:_ Could you tell me how Skroutz started using Clojure?

_Giorgos:_ I don't remember exactly. I remember that I didn't want to
use Ruby for a specific problem - I've had very bad experiences with
processes and segfaults with Ruby.

_Jon:_ But why pick a dynamic lisp language with origins dating back to
1957?

_Nikos:_ Giorgos was already a fan. We both liked Clojure and we were
waiting for a chance to do something useful with it.

_Giorgos:_ Ruby is good but it is not a good fit for everything. We've
been adding new languages such as Python and Clojure along with some
Java for wrapping [Elastic](https://www.elastic.co/) plugins.

Clojure is used on one of the largest projects outside the Ruby
monolith. We use it primarily to crunch user activity logs, a job that
was done before using cron jobs and scripts writing to
[MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/).

_Nikos:_ Giorgos led an effort to store all log data into
[Elastic](https://www.elastic.co/) cluster. We then wrote a Clojure
service to crunch this data providing a layer of analysis on top of what
the raw Elastic queries gave us. This allowed us to provide enhanced
personalisaton functionality for our users such as recommending
additional categories of products.

_Giorgos:_ The same Clojure service also crunched stored user queries to
power auto-complete and search suggestions.

import sl from '../../assets/blog/skroutz-logo.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sl} />

_Nikos:_ We wanted to experience Clojure and to use it on something
real. We felt that Clojure fitted this problem of data crunching well.

_Giorgos:_ It is very difficult to use a new language attached to a
monolith. If you want to experiment you should find the right place, and
for us this was a good opportunity; a Microservice.

_Jon:_ How did it work out?

_Nikos:_ Very well.

_Giorgos:_ It's been running 18 months. It was initially a challenge - I
had a team 4 juniors and no one knew Clojure, but the experiement went
really went.

_Nikos:_ We spent our Christmas vacation learning Clojure!

_Giorgos:_ I thought it was impossible but then we did it.

_Nikos:_ It was straightforward really - Giorgos came up with a skeleton
and we started building functions on it - this went pretty well. The
hardest part was what Giorgos did at the start; setting up a http server
with [Liberator](http://clojure-liberator.github.io/liberator/) then
managing the application lifecycle and deployment.

_Giorgos:_ It was a standard stack of
[Ring](https://github.com/ring-clojure),
[Compojure](https://github.com/weavejester/compojure), and
[Liberator](http://clojure-liberator.github.io/liberator/). We also used
[Schema](https://github.com/plumatic/schema).

We serve a lot of features from this microservice. We are very confident
with it. This is the main thing we needed: confidence that nothing will
break. It's easy to upgrade and predictable.

# The future

_Jon:_ What's the future of the Ruby monolith?

_Nikos:_: There was a time when Giorgos wanted to rewrite the main
search in Clojure.

_Giorgos:_ We don't have the resources now to rewrite the monotlith in a
big-bang approach. We will proceed step by step, looking for
opportunities that present themselves, i.e. a new service, or a refactor
of an existing one.

import ra from '../../assets/blog/rails.png'

<Image alt='image' width={200} src={ra} />

# Ruby Vs Clojure

_Jon:_ Could you elaborate more on Ruby vs Clojure?

_Nikos:_ The turning point was when I start could focusing on the real
problem rather than managing stateful objects and relationships as you
would in Ruby.

_Giorgos:_ The focus is on functions rather than objects; the transition
is good.

_Jon:_ What about the ecosystem of Ruby compared with Clojure?

_Nikos:_ We currently have a strong solution with Rails and a strong
ecosystem around it.

_Giorgos:_ We don't need a Rails clone, but we need a flagship to
attract people to the language. This could be Datomic.

import li from '../../assets/blog/webdevbook.jpg'

<Image alt='image' width={300} src={li} />

_Nikos:_ I miss the ecosystem of Ruby. In Clojure it feels more
fragmented with lots of library choices and no clear winner. Some are
maintained by a single person and can simply stop being developed. This
is where having a big umbrella project would help.

_Giorgos:_ It can be complicated to make a library decision. A company
or software house should not be depending on a single person which is
often the case.

_Jon:_ Maybe [Luminus](http://www.luminus.org.uk/) or the upcoming
[Arachne](http://arachne-framework.org/) could help with this. But why
not a Rails in Clojure?

_Giorgos:_ No we don't want a Clojure version of Rails! I don't have
time to answer this, but I would say we just need more flagship
libraries.

_Nikos:_ In general Ruby devs are switching to
[Elixir](http://elixir-lang.org/) and some to Clojure.

# Learning Clojure and Editors

_Jon:_ What IDE do you use?

_Nikos:_ We learnt Emacs for this project. We like it so much that we're
now using it to edit our Ruby code too.

_Jon:_ Would you recommend learning Clojure and Emacs at the same time?

_Giorgos:_ To be honest, I wouldn't recommend learning both as it's very
difficult. The advice I would give is to learn Clojure and then Emacs.

import ko from '../../assets/blog/koans.png'

<Image alt='image' src={ko} />

_Nikos:_ We have a developer learning Clojure now. We told him to learn
Emacs first for his Ruby code, and then we recommended [Clojure
Koans](http://clojurekoans.com/) and some books. Then we paired up with
him to solve some selected issues and bugs. This was the easy part.

# State of Clojure

_Jon:_ What do you think is the current state of Clojure adoption?

_Nikos:_ I want to see more big projects, more blogs and different
people using it.

_Jon:_ What is the state of Clojure in Athens?

_Nikos:_ Giorgos was a founder of the Athens Clojure meetup (I help run
it now too - as well as [Stathis
Sideris](https://twitter.com/stathissideris) and one other) and we host
dojos in our office. The last one went really well with 25-30 people
turning up, which was over our expectations. Athens doesn't have a lot
of active Clojure programmers.

_Jon:_ What's your view on the current state of Clojure the language?

_Nikos:_ We are very interested in Spec and we are experimenting. We use
Schema. We are also experimenting with ClojureScript but nothing real
yet.

# Resources

Check out the [Skroutz engineering
blog](https://engineering.skroutz.gr/).
