---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in Europe: Akvo'
description: 'Helping to deliver aid'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-09-27'
heroImage: 'akvo-logo.jpg'
clojureIn: { season: 'one' }
---

> It takes the right people with the right motivation and the right
> tools to make a project succeed.

# A Multi-National Delivering Aid

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'
import akvoflow from '../../assets/blog/akvoflow.png'

<Image alt='image' src={akvoflow} />

[Akvo](http://akvo.org/about-us/) is an international not-for-profit,
not-for-loss organization with headquarters in the Netherlands. They use
government grants to develop and enhance tools that are used in 60+
countries around the world to help the distribution and governance of
aid. They open-source their software every step of the way.

[Akvo flow](http://akvo.org/products/akvoflow/#overview) is a mobile
application that helps users to quickly map out developing situations on
the ground, for example to collate the locations of water pumps in
relation to villages. Prior to more sophisticated tools the gathering of
data was traditionally achieved using a pen, paper and camera. Now the
job can be done using a smartphone that has GPS, an in-built camera, and
reliable data synchronisation to a remote platform.

All of this data is fed back into a centralised reporting system that
allows overseers to make better decisions on where to co-ordinate aid,
and to track the impact that existing aid is having.

import akvopic from '../../assets/blog/akvopic.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={akvopic} />

I caught up with Iván Perdomo, a developer at Akvo who introduced
Clojure. He resides in Pamplona Spain and our interview coincided with
the city's annual bull festival. He was wisely staying off the streets.

# The company

_Jon:_ How many developers work at Akvo and how are they spread across
Europe?

_Iván:_ We have around 20 people living in Finland, Sweden, the UK, the
Netherlands and Spain (Barcelona and Pamplona). We also have a Bangalore
office running [Akvo Caddisfly](http://akvo.org/akvo-caddisfly/), a
project to analyze photos of water in an attempt to diagnose what level
of fluoride the water has.

The organization started off by being distributed. One co-founder is in
the Netherlands (the Hague) and the other is in Sweden. The mantra of
the company is that it doesn't matter where you live if you're the right
person. We've got small clumps of people spread all over.

import ivan from '../../assets/blog/ivan.png'

<Image alt='image' src={ivan} />

# The history of Clojure at Akvo

_Jon:_ When did you join and why?

_Iván:_ Akvo is a non-profit organization that builds open source
software, this is the first thing that attracted me. I joined in Autumn 2012.

_Jon:_ How did Clojure get started at Akvo?

_Iván:_ In May 2013 we decided that we needed to break up a Java based
monolith that was running on Google App engine.

We identified some Java code we could prise away into a different
service and I wrapped this Java code in a HTTP layer built using
Clojure. It was 2 weeks of budget, but now the service has been running
ever since. This is [Akvo Flow
Services](https://github.com/akvo/akvo-flow-services), our first Clojure
experience.

_Jon:_ Why Clojure in particular?

import progclojure from '../../assets/blog/progclojure.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={progclojure} alt='euroclojure' />

_Iván:_ I started looking at Clojure in 2011 - I wanted to learn
something different to Java and JavaScript. I bought the first book -
[Programming clojure by Stuart Halloway](https://pragprog.com/book/shcloj/programming-clojure) and
liked what I saw. I watched and re-watched [Rich's talks](https://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy).

What impresses me about Clojure is the foundation of Immutability -
never changing the values. We do not need to be concerned if we pass a
data-structure around and it gets modified, this is something that has
bit me often pre-Clojure.

I've been to all the [EuroClojures](https://euroclojure.org) and now I'm
trying now to setup a functional programming meet-up in the small city
of Pamplona where I live.

_Jon:_ How has Akvo progressed with Clojure?

In 2014 we started to look at broadening our range of products and the
underlying architecture. We decided that instead of building everything
using loosely coupled APIs communicating with each other using HTTP, we
would go down the [event sourced](http://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html) route
instead.

Now we have systems that publish events to a central place - a central
store of events. The usual approach here is to use
[Kafka](http://kafka.apache.org/), but for us as a small team we went
for a slimmed down and lightweight PostgreSQL db version instead. We
expose a HTTP layer on top so that any system can post events to a given
_topic_. A consumer can then connect to the DB and read events.

We have written our event consumers in Clojure. One consumer transforms
the data and pushes it to a self-hosted [CartoDB](https://carto.com/)
installation (a Geographical Information System), another takes the data
and normalizes it for reporting purposes.

import eclogo from '../../assets/blog/eclogo.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={eclogo} alt='EuroClojure' />

# Introducing Clojure

_Jon:_ I think you're probably unique in introducing Clojure to a
completely distributed organization, what's that been like?

_Iván:_ I tried to introduce CLJ to my last organization and failed. My
take now is that it takes a lot of effort to share your enthusiastic
view, and it takes an extra effort to share the ideas behind Clojure and
of the underlying mechanics. Why is Clojure better or different to Java?
We have to focus on the advantages for this effort to be a success.

Instead of focusing on low level details focus on the big ideas, focus
on the _whys_ and not the _hows_.

import akvocollage from '../../assets/blog/akvocollage.png'

<Image alt='image' src={akvocollage} alt='EuroClojure' />

# Upskilling

_Jon:_ How did you go about training people up?

_Iván:_ On Fridays I ran some remote Clojure sessions - I opened up a
REPL and shared my screen, explaining what the code did that powered our
services. This got some traction. We now run more generic _learning
sessions_ on Thursdays.

For senior people it's more of a challenge to onboard people into
Clojure. As a senior dev you may have to change your mindset, and even
change your editor in some cases.

To help with this I do lots of screen sharing - advising and helping
developers to improve their code and to reduce verbosity (see this code
here, let me explain what I did here that's similar using some core
functions). I like to walk people through the code.

_Jon:_ How many Clojure devs have you got now?

_Iván:_ We have five Clojure devs working in total. After seeing the joy
of working with Clojure there are now more people interested.

# Hiring

_Jon:_ Have you tried to hire for Clojure devs?

_Iván:_ We've had developers seek out and join Akvo because of our open
source work and Clojure. One example is
[Jonas](https://github.com/jonase) the developer behind the [lint tool Eastwood](https://github.com/jonase/eastwood).

# The Clojure future?

import akvolumenlogo from '../../assets/blog/akvolumenlogo.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={akvolumenlogo} />

_Jon:_ What's the future for Clojure at Akvo?

_Iván:_ Recently we've built a new data visualization platform - [Akvo Lumen](https://github.com/akvo/akvo-lumen). It's got Clojure on the
back-end and React.js on the front-end.

With Lumen we will able to go faster and produce good quality software
because of Clojure. This is a measure of the tech but also, a project
succeeds or fail depending on people being happy. Projects are
successful when developers enjoy what they do and put everything in to
make it succeed.

In less than 3 months we got a new MVP up and running - we made good
architectural decisions but our users also saw visible progress. The
founders are really interested and happy.

It takes the right people with the right motivation and the right tools
to make a project succeed.

import rich from '../../assets/blog/103-clojure-spec-with-rich-hickey.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={rich} />

# State of Clojure

_Jon:_ A standard question I always ask, what's the state of Clojure
like in your area, in this case Pamplona in Spain?

_Iván:_ In Spain it's still niche - although three weeks ago there was a
software craftmanship event in Pamplona with a session in Clojure and
Scala. In northern Europe Clojure is more accepted.

_Jon:_ Anything that excites you in the development of Clojure itself?

_Iván:_ I'm quite excited about
[Clojure.spec](http://clojure.org/about/spec). I've written some spec
like functions and will move to Spec when it's more readily available.

# Technologies

import keycloak from '../../assets/blog/keycloak.png'

<Image alt='image' src={keycloak} />

_Jon:_ Any particular technologies you'd like to give a shout out to?

_Iván:_ [OpenID Connect](http://openid.net/connect/) and
[Keycloak](http://www.keycloak.org/) as an implementation of that. I
have written an [example Ring web app served with Immutant secured with Keycloak](https://github.com/iperdomo/immutant-keycloak).
