---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in Toronto: University Health Network'
description: 'Powering health with Clojure'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2017-10-06'
heroImage: 'uhn-logo.jpg'
clojureIn: { season: 'one', industry: 'healthcare' }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

> The small number of constructs put together becomes very powerful.

# Researching Health

import uhn from '../../assets/blog/uhn.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={uhn} />

[University Health Network](http://www.uhn.ca/) is a collaboration
between Downtown Hospitals and the [University of
Toronto](https://www.utoronto.ca/), providing a platform for clinical
treatments, and continuous research on improvement of patient care.

Dmitri Sotnikov is the maintainer of the [Luminus Web
Framework](http://www.luminusweb.net/) and author of the book [Web
Development with
Clojure](https://www.amazon.com/Web-Development-Clojure-Build-Bulletproof/dp/1680500821).
He plays an active role in the local vibrant Toronto Clojure community,
and is an enthusiastic evangelist for the language, going by the handle
[`Yogthos`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yog-Sothoth).

I caught up with Dmitri for a Q&A, before meeting in person in Toronto.

**_Jon: What functionality does the University Health Network
provide?_**

_Dmitri:_ We build applications for clinical use that capture
information from across the whole of a patient's workflow, from initial
consultation through to treatment. This information goes onto the
patient's chart, along with information from their family doctor.

The platform contains forms that people will fill out and is used
hospital wide, catering for multiple users working on the same datasets
simultaneously, like Google Docs. Doctors fill out the medical parts and
pharmacists will complete medications. Medical professionals from a
range of different disciplines collaborate, impacting the design.

On a technical level, this involves pushing data changes out to various
clients, working out which fields should be locked and so on, involving
business logic. We also generate reports; I built and open sourced the
[clj-pdf](https://github.com/yogthos/clj-pdf) library that we used for
building PDFs.

import uhn2 from '../../assets/blog/uhn_team.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={uhn2} />

# Clojure

**_Jon: What was your journey to finding Clojure?_**

_Dmitri:_ My prior experience was J2EE enterprise; I found this took a
lot of boilerplate to get the application going and the business logic
was lost in all of this. I found that when you write so much code, you
become attached to it, and then you're really reluctant to change it
unless you absolutely have to.

Also the development process/cycle is slow. If it works minimally,
functionally, it's good enough.

Once I realized this, I looked at other technologies. I played around a
bit with Haskell, and I became interested in the functional over the
imperative. I enjoyed working with Haskell - I used it personally for a
year - but it's not the kind of language that you can put in production
like you can with the JVM. Everything is different; Haskell has its own
runtime and deployment tools etc. But what Haskell did give me was an
appreciation for the functional style, the quick iteration and local
reasoning about code.

import wd from '../../assets/blog/web-dev-with-clojure.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={wd} />

**_Jon: And then... Clojure?_**

_Dmitri:_ I started to look at the FP languages on the JVM and the main
two were Scala and Clojure. Scala was superficially closer to Java. It
has functional structures - this is great - but then I wrote programs
the same way I would in Java and found I wasn't really taking advantage
of the functional aspects. The other problem is that the language is
complex. I had difficulty reading my own Scala code.

This led me to learn Clojure. Initially it was jarring - the language
and syntax is so different - but then there is a lot of regularity to
it. The small number of constructs put together then becomes very
powerful.

I wanted a simple way to solve problems without additional complexity. I
wanted something to let me focus on the problem I was trying to solve.

**_Jon: How did you introduce Clojure at work?_**

_Dmitri:_ Initially by creating some internal tooling, something to
check logs and databases. This was low risk and it let me try Clojure in
production in a safe manner where it didn't affect the business.

I started with three developers who used Clojure to start playing with
ideas. Clojure got into production because the prototypes that we built
worked, and we had people wanting to support them.

If you are going to introduce Clojure into a workplace, then it's
important to do it in a responsible way. We have had situations where
people have introduced new technologies, and have done so successfully,
but then they leave. We have to reduce the getting-hit-by-a-bus factor
by making sure the technologies we choose are a good fit for the
organization and are able to be supported appropriately.

**_Jon: How did you find up-skilling and training others?_**

_Dmitri:_ You need to consider the human factor when introducing
technology. It's getting better now, but there's a lack of Clojure
documentation for beginners, which is a problem. There are lots of blog
posts but they are outdated.

I think it's so important to have central documentation and this why I
built [Luminus](http://www.luminusweb.net/). I try to keep to Luminus up
to date.

[Clojure Docs](https://clojuredocs.org/) is the best resource for API
documentation as it has examples.

**_Jon: Yeah, Clojure Docs is cool._**

_Dmitri:_ Another issue for newcomers is the development environment.
Both Cursive and Emacs require investment to learn; there's no
environment that people can start using quickly. I've seen people using
Clojure in Atom/Sublime and struggle without parenthesis management, and
they're like, \"How do people work with this? This is terrible!\"

Or they develop without the REPL and they're not getting the live
development workflow benefit, just getting the slow compilation times! I
think this drives a lot of people away for the wrong reasons.

I think this is where ClojureScript is helping a lot, because it's
something people can try easily and quickly. I taught a workshop last
year for JavaScript developers. We focused on
[Reagent](https://reagent-project.github.io/) and allowed them to use
their own favorite editor. Because of Figwheel they were getting live
reloads in the browser, and without worrying about the REPL, they could
already see the live workflow really quickly. This was a big success.

import lum from '../../assets/blog/luminus.png'

<Image alt='image' width={200} src={lum} />

**_Jon: Tell me about Luminus?_**

_Dmitri:_ About six years ago in Clojure, a lot of the ecosystems didn't
exist, so I created Luminus to allow us to build applications in a
consistent way. Selmer was a familiar templating language for us
initially. Now the backend is Hiccup, which integrates well with
ClojureScript and Reagent.

ClojureScript is helping people to try Clojure very quickly.
[Luminus](http://www.luminusweb.net/) has a ClojureScript template with
[Lein](https://leiningen.org/),
[Figwheel](https://github.com/bhauman/lein-figwheel), and
[Reagent](https://reagent-project.github.io/), that brings up a webapp
with the live code reloading in the browser.

**_Jon: Luminus uses templates and newer frameworks such as Duct and
Arachne are using modules. What are your thoughts on modules vs
templates?_**

_Dmitri:_ [Duct](https://github.com/duct-framework/duct) is inspired a
lot by [Arachne](http://arachne-framework.org/), the newer version using
[Integrant](https://github.com/duct-framework/duct) is promising.

There are pros and cons to both approaches. The difference is how you do
your wiring in your application. Luminus gives you a template where the
wiring is done directly in the application, but with the module approach
you do the wiring outside as data.

Everything you can do with modules you can ultimately do with libraries.
It's rare to switch out your database so you don't need to optimize the
wiring up of the database. The biggest job will be swapping out your SQL
and changing syntax.

I also find that it's easier to reason about the wiring I wrote myself.
If there's indirection involved, then I have to understand how the
indirection works, and keep that in my head.

So that's why Luminus is sticking with the template approach. Once you
generate your application from a template, and it works the way you need
it to, then you can focus on the parts that you actually care about.

**_Jon: But templates are a one-off, so once you've used the template
for your application, that's it. Whereas with Arachne and Duct, they
will be continuously updated. You keep upgrading and suddenly you'll get
all the nice things._**

_Dmitri:_ You might still have to make some changes in your code when
you upgrade, so I don't see too much difference from updating library
dependencies.

**_Jon: I guess it's a bit like using Clojure wrapper libraries that
wrap the Java ones, sometimes they can lag behind the main library, or
that they expose a semantically different API. Now I just want to I go
straight to the raw library wherever I can, I want to minimize the
amount of wrappers._**

_Dmitri:_ This is exactly what I found as well. Ultimately, in my
experience, the most maintainable code is the code that's the most
direct. So the less indirection I have, the easier it is to come back
and relearn it. And this is why, even if there is a bit more friction
updating libraries and so on, I ultimately have more confidence that the
code is doing what I want it to be doing -- because I wrote it!

Clojure has a good story for libraries keeping the API stable. This is
partially because the libraries tend to be well focused, they tend to
solve a single problem. Often you hear people worry that,
\"`Oh this library hasn't been updated in two years.`\" But it works.

**_Jon: Why do we keep libraries stable? Is it just because it's a
simpler language and less code?_**

_Dmitri:_ I think that plays a role, but a bigger part of it is the
community mindset. Because the community is discouraged from making
these big omnibus libraries from the start, so the libraries tend to be
fairly short. When you look through most libraries, they have a few
hundred lines of code in them. Often under a thousand.

# Hiring

**_Jon: How have you found the hiring process?_**

_Dmitri:_ No problems. We've never hired a Clojure dev; the last one we
hired had experience of C#, .NET, and PHP. We don't expect people to
know functional programming when we interview them, but we do ask about
algorithms, data-structures, and what projects they have been on.

Ultimately I like to treat interviews as a pair-programming exercise.
The last person applied because he wanted to do something different - he
wanted to try Clojure and learn it. It took a couple of weeks for him to
ramp up.

I would say that it's easier to hire a junior Clojure developer than a
senior one. People just out of school are still of that mindset that
they're learning things, and they have fewer preconceptions about how
you write applications and how you should structure code in the real
world.

# State of Clojure

**_Jon: What's your view on Clojure: how could it be improved? Where is
it going?_**

_Dmitri:_ It's very exciting, ClojureScript has the potential to have a
much bigger reach.

People who work with JavaScript are more receptive than those working
with Java because a) they're working with a dynamic language already and
b) the way a lot of people use JavaScript now is fairly functional.

A lot of Java developers don't really feel that Java is a bad language.
Whereas a lot of JavaScript developers do agree that JavaScript is
problematic. The concept of using hosted languages such as ClojureScript
and TypeScript is very popular and has become accepted within the
JavaScript community.

The Clojure tooling is also better (Leiningen and live code reloading).
With JavaScript there are usually three to four different tools that you
have to juggle.

import ym from '../../assets/blog/yogthos-malcolm-jon.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ym} />

**_Jon: Do you see Clojure adoption growing?_**

_Dmitri:_ It is growing, but it's important to have a grass-roots
community of people trying it out on their own. This is what contributes
to libraries, to people writing guides and documentation and telling
their friends about it.

It's important for those of us who are professional users to be
sensitive towards the people starting out. Once you have internalised
the development experience of working with Clojure, we can often forget
what it was like to start out and to learn a new language with a new
editor and a whole new paradigm.

For example a lot of people in the community, when they see discussions
like \"I don't see the problem with stacktraces and error messages\",
they are not thinking of the new users.

**_Jon: I'm guilty of that._**

_Dmitri:_ The only reason I'm cognisant of this is because I work with
beginners often. Day to day I end up checking myself: \"Wait! I thought
this was obvious, but clearly it's not.\"

The way for Clojure to grow is to reduce friction for beginners.

**_Jon: What's the state of Clojure in Toronto?_**

_Dmitri:_ It's growing significantly. When I started going to a meetup
four years ago, everyone was doing Clojure as a hobby, but today pretty
much everyone is doing it professionally. For a few years it wasn't
obvious that it would be big here - but now it is.

# Tech shout out

**_Jon: What are your favorite technologies at the moment?_**

_Dmitri:_ Definitely [Reagent](https://reagent-project.github.io/) and
[re-frame](https://reagent-project.github.io/), the
[Ring](https://reagent-project.github.io/) stack of
[Ring](https://reagent-project.github.io/)/[Compojure](https://github.com/weavejester/compojure)/[Compojure-API](https://github.com/metosin/compojure-api)/[Sente](https://github.com/ptaoussanis/sente).

Reagent introduces very few concepts, and once you have the concepts you
can go and build largescale apps, which isn't the case for React itself.

[Sente](https://github.com/ptaoussanis/sente) has been really great for
us, because our application uses websockets. We started hand rolling our
own originally, but we found there were a lot of problematic edge cases
such as reconnects, Ajax, error handling and so on. Sente actually added
a lot of value, so I have to give a little shout out to it!

In future we may start using [GraphQL](http://graphql.org/), whatever we
put into the Luminus template.

I'm really enjoying [HugSQL](https://github.com/layerware/hugsql) for
the database access. I really like the concept that you can write plain
SQL.

**_Jon: I'm quite a fan of HoneySQL._**

_Dmitri:_ I think [HoneySQL](https://github.com/jkk/honeysql) is great -
it's similar to [Hiccup](https://github.com/weavejester/hiccup) in being
a data structure - it's just in our case we don't need to make
composable queries and we often work with DBAs. It's very easy for us to
grab something from DBAs and stick it in the file -- done!

# Editors

import cursive from '../../assets/blog/cursive.png'

<Image alt='image' src={cursive} />

**_Jon: What editor do you use?_**

_Dmitri:_ I'm using [Cursive](https://cursive-ide.com/). I started out
using Eclipse for Java development and when I started using Clojure, I
started using
[Counterclockwise](http://doc.ccw-ide.org/documentation.html). When
Cursive came out I was like, \"Oh, this is like what I'm used to -- but
better!\"

Familiarity is important. I don't think I would have started using
Clojure if I wasn't able to use it from Eclipse originally. A new
language in the same environment was low friction. If I had to use Emacs
maybe I would have learnt it, but maybe not, it's hard to say how it
would have gone.

I think it's really important to have editors that people already know.
You want people to focus on Clojure as a language, and keep everything
else the same.

# Resources

Checkout Dmitri's [twitter](https://twitter.com/yogthos), his
[GitHub](https://github.com/yogthos), his
[book](https://www.amazon.com/Web-Development-Clojure-Build-Bulletproof/dp/1680500821),
his [blog](http://yogthos.net/), and the [University Health
Network](http://www.uhn.ca/corporate/Careers/Pages/career_opportunities.aspx).
