---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in Berlin: Zalando'
description: 'Using Clojure to power a fashion platform'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPostClojureIn.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-11-30'
heroImage: 'zalando-logo.jpg'
clojureIn:
  {
    season: 'one',
    industry: 'e-commerce',
    quote: '"Clojure is almost in adopt."'
  }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

# A growing fashion company

import z from '../../assets/blog/zalando-logo.png'

<Image alt='image' src={z} />

[Zalando](https://www.zalando.de/) is Europe's leading online platform
for fashion. It originated in 2008 as an online shoes retailer and has
since expanded into 15 markets across Europe.

They now have over 11,000 employees with 1600 working in tech. The
website has over 160 million visits per month (\~65% mobile) with 19
million active customers. The company made over 3 billion EUR in net
sales in 2015.

Their technology HQ is in Berlin and they have offices in other parts of
Germany, Helsinki and Dublin.

I caught up with software engineer [Dmitrii
Balakhonskii](https://github.com/dryewo) to learn more.

# Background

_Jon:_ Could you give me some background on the tech at Zalando?

_Dmitrii:_ In the beginning there was a uniform monolithic technology
stack; mostly Java applications running in Tomcat clusters.

There was a strict policy on choosing technologies and so developers
were restricted; not able to choose the technologies they'd love to work
with. As the tech team grew the delivery speed was slowing down. Also
there were not as many candidates applying and a lack of excitement
about what we were doing.

import ra from '../../assets/blog/radical-agility.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ra} />

_Jon:_ What changed?

_Dmitrii:_ The idea came to use a totally new approach to managing
developers: what we call [Radical
Agility](https://tech.zalando.com/blog/radical-agility-study-notes/). In
March 2015 the teams became autonomous teams and treated as first class
citizens. The management team defined what to expect and the team
decided on how to deliver. The teams could decide which technologies to
use.

The overall tech team became more diverse, using Scala, Clojure, and Go
in some teams. This diversity made the jobs of the developers more
interesting, fun and inspiring.

_Jon:_ How do you co-ordinate across teams?

_Dmitrii:_ We have common standards; everyone builds Microservices using
REST [API-first](http://www.api-first.com/). First a team writes a
description of an API then publishes it and aligns with the other teams
when they implement.

_Jon:_ What is the mix of technologies?

_Dmitrii:_ There is more Scala used and the majority is still doing
Java. We have around 10 teams using Clojure. As a company we are mostly
JVM based.

import zd from '../../assets/blog/zalando-dojo.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={zd} />

# Clojure

_Jon:_ How did Clojure get started at Zalando?

_Dmitrii:_ At one stage we decided to start using AWS. To provide all
teams with a uniform approach a special Platform team was organized.

They built a middleware product; an abstraction layer on top of the
cloud written in Clojure called [STUPS](https://stups.io/). Nearly
everyone who deploys into the cloud now uses STUPS.

[Tobias Sarnowski](https://github.com/sarnowski) originally introduced
Clojure. People saw products successfully built using Clojure and
followed suit, embracing the language.

We've now been using Clojure for 2 years, growing and improving. We have
our [own technology
radar](https://tech.zalando.com/blog/zalando-tech-radar/) - inspired by
the [JUXT Clojure radar](https://juxt.pro/radar.html), Clojure is almost
in adopt.

_Jon:_ What do you yourself work on?

_Dmitrii:_ I'm maintaining [Pier
One](https://github.com/zalando-stups/pierone). It's a Docker registry
that satisfies our company requirements such as OAuth, S3 backend, and
immutable tags. We have about 40k Docker images it manages.

It's written in Clojure and I'm happy with it; the codebase is small and
easy to maintain.

import zh from '../../assets/blog/zalando-hunter.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={zh} />

_Jon:_ Has Clojure grown outside of the deployment layer?

_Dmitrii:_ Yes, one use case is for internal tools such as proxies,
infrastructure tools and CI servers. We have a team that provides
continuous integration services to the other teams. We have about 200 CI
workers that are powered down at night, but then you can still use them
if you want to.

Hunter Kelly [presented at last years
Clojure/Conj](https://tech.zalando.com/blog/how-zalandos-using-clojurespark-slides/)
on using Clojure and Spark to _understand fashion in a more quantitative
manner_.

We have written libraries in Clojure to help teams write Microservices.
[Friboo](https://github.com/zalando/friboo) is an example that offers
common components and encourages an API First approach using REST and
Swagger.

# People

_Jon:_ Do you think that Clojure has made a difference to IT at Zalando?

_Dmitrii:_ It's not so much the technology that makes a difference, but
the people being inspired and motivated when they make a decision. Both
Scala and Clojure are successful here for this reason. There is no
overall trend - our goal is to be more attractive to developers.

When we hire developers they don't immediately join a specific team. The
first month they attend workshops and get to know the company. Then the
teams present themselves to the new hires and the new developers get to
decide which team to join. This makes teams compete to be attractive.

# Upskilling

import lc from '../../assets/blog/living-clojure.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={lc} />

_Jon:_ How do you go about training and upskilling?

_Dmitrii:_ For training we have weekly Clojure workshops. We also have a
Clojure mentoring program where people can register and do exercises
from the [Living Clojure
book](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920034292.do) by [Carin
Meier](https://github.com/gigasquid).

_Jon:_ How have people taken to learning Clojure?

_Dmitrii:_ I had a developer join our team who was new to Clojure. After
three months he wrote a proxy server that wrapped a legacy server and
was highly performant. Three months was enough for him to deliver
production code.

We have seen that people are interested in growing and developing their
careers. We also have a management team to take people out of their
comfort zone and to challenge them with new ideas.

# State of Clojure

import cb from '../../assets/blog/clojure-bridge.png'

<Image alt='image' src={cb} />

_Jon:_ What is the state of Clojure in Berlin?

_Dmitrii:_ Clojure in Berlin is quite active - we have monthly meet ups
with about 50 people in attendance. I go from time to time and see new
faces there. There are other companies here doing Clojure.

We also have a ClojureBridge event 3 times a year - organized by fellow
Clojure enthusiasts. I worked as a coach there.

_Jon:_ Anything that interests you in the development of the Clojure
language?

_Dmitrii:_ I'm very exciting about a big new feature; clojure.spec.
There is lots to explore here. There is very few alternatives to this in
other languages. It's very nicely designed and the way of the future.

import rh from '../../assets/blog/103-clojure-spec-with-rich-hickey.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={rh} />

_Jon:_ What's so radical about Spec?

_Dmitrii:_ It's an alternative way of ensuring the data has the shape
you expect it to have. It's the answer from the dynamic typing world to
the compile time checks in static languages, but solved in a nicely
dynamic and idiomatic way. The presence of Clojure.spec will make
Clojure easier to sell.

# Technologies

_Jon Pither:_ Any technologies you'd like to give a shout out to?

_Dmitrii:_ Stuart Sierra's [Component
framework](https://github.com/stuartsierra/component) which is a big
thing. All our services are based on Component. Also
[Midje](https://github.com/marick/Midje), it's really a step up from
clojure.test. I like that you can mock and check everything in every
possible way; very convenient.

# Resources

Check out the [Zalando tech blog](https://tech.zalando.com/blog/).
