---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure In the UK: Yapster'
description: 'Helping organizations to chat'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2017-08-29'
heroImage: 'yapster-logo.jpg'
clojureIn: { season: 'one', industry: 'mobile' }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

> We needed to get moving quickly

# Corporate Chat

import yb from '../../assets/blog/yapster-banner.png'

<Image alt='image' src={yb} />

[Yapster](https://www.yapster.info/) is a corporate chat product, along
the lines of [WhatsApp](https://www.whatsapp.com/) and
[Slack](https://slack.com). It's different to either in that it ingests
HR and payroll data and allows messaging based on all the entities
extracted, including people, locations, areas, job functions and
intersections of the entities.

Some of the biggest names in retail and hospitality, including Ann
Summers, Caffe Nero, SuperDry, Ryman and Wyevale Garden Centres are
working with Yapster to bring the technology to their workforces.
Yapster's customers benefit from being able to ask the development team
for custom features, and for the ability to integrate with their
existing systems, such as HR and finance databases.

# Background

_Jon:_ What's the background to Yapster?

_Craig:_ The idea for the product that would eventually become Yapster
was dreamt up in the pub back in 2015. We knew we wanted to do something
in mobile and Rob had been thinking a lot about how we could help large
companies to become less dysfunctional and more efficient.

This got us thinking about enterprise-level mobile messaging. The likes
of Yammer, Slack and Facebook Workplace were already established, but
there was a lightbulb moment when a senior contact in one of the world's
largest retailers pointed out that there are millions of employees in
service industries that never use a desktop computer. At this point the
target audience for Yapster became clear. We started out thinking of
applications you could build on top of basic chat, such as time
management and shift-swapping applications. We did some prototypes, but
actually found that we got good traction with just our chat product. Now
we're supporting _apps layered on chat_ such as time-management and
help-desk integration, using our API for integration.

We started cutting code 2 years ago.

import ony from '../../assets/blog/onyx.png'

<Image alt='image' width={200} src={ony} />

# The Tech

_Jon:_ What's your tech stack?

_Craig:_ I set out to build something that would scale well. We started
with [Cassandra](http://cassandra.apache.org/) and
[Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/) for persistent pub/sub. The
application itself is written in Clojure and ClojureScript.

The backend API is stream processing and uses a web framework called
[Yada](https://github.com/juxt/yada) and
[Onyx](https://github.com/onyx-platform/onyx) for stream processing.

For native apps we deploy HTML/CSS/JavaScript via
[Cordova](http://mubaloo.com/cordova-vs-native-apps/).

_Jon:_ What about [React
Native](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/)?

_Craig:_ If we were starting again, then yes, but it was a beta for
Android back then and it didn't support web.

Cordova has been good; there aren't many areas where it's obvious that
it's a webapp vs a native app. Since we use a ClojureScript stack
consisting of [re-frame](https://github.com/Day8/re-frame) and
[Reagent](https://reagent-project.github.io/), there is the real
possibility of a relatively sane migration path to React native. We may
even do it.

import yt from '../../assets/blog/yapster-team.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={yt} />

_Jon:_ How about [re-frame](https://github.com/Day8/re-frame)?

_Craig:_ It answers the problem of state management, with which Reagent
gives you little help. With Reagent it's possible to get yourself into a
tangle, with lots of atoms spread around your views. The re-frame model
is very simple and we've had a very easy time with it.

_Jon:_ [Onyx](https://github.com/onyx-platform/onyx)?

_Craig:_ We don't use many of the more advanced features such as
streaming aggregations. We mainly use it for pulling data out of Kafka
and feeding our message routing and notification pipelines (for example
pushing to mobile devices via websockets). The flow-conditions concept
makes it very easy to build tasks which generate effect data structures.
Unlike [Storm](http://storm.apache.org/) it doesn't tie you to a
particular Clojure version. With Onyx it's trivial to add more tasks,
and it manages error flows and reprocessing in the case of temporary
failures.

_Jon:_ Pretend I'm not from JUXT, what's your opinion of
[Yada](https://github.com/juxt/yada)?

_Craig:_ Great actually. We wanted a fully asynchronous non-blocking
back end. If you can climb the hill of handling async requests then it
becomes simpler after, where back-pressure and streams are taken care
of. All of our back end is non-blocking, we also use
[Manifold](https://github.com/ztellman/manifold) because of
[Aleph](https://github.com/ztellman/aleph) (which Yada is built on).

Also, [Cats](https://github.com/funcool/cats) has worked out brilliantly
for structuring our async code. Cats code reads largely like sequential
code. So far it hasn't been hard to get new devs to work on it. Though
if you stick them in front of the Wikipedia page on what is a monad,
then it might not work so well!

A while ago we excised all of the `core.async` code in the backend in
favor of Manifold and Cats. We use
[Alia](https://github.com/mpenet/alia) as our fundamental Cassandra
interaction library which wraps the
[Datastax](https://www.datastax.com/) Java client. It's well put
together, handling the async side very well.

We have a library
[er-cassandra](https://github.com/employeerepublic/er-cassandra) that
returns high level Clojure maps to us from Cassandra, and looks after
the denormalisation that Cassandra models generally require.

# Clojure

_Jon:_ Why choose Clojure in the first place?

_Craig:_ Familiarity; we needed to get moving quickly. I had spent the
previous two years working with Clojure and enjoyed the experience.

I've probably written a few hundred thousand lines of Clojure in the
last few years, I've never got to the point when I needed to start again
with a code-base.

_Jon:_ The Lisp bottom-up programming experience..?

_Craig:_ Yes, Clojure is great for growing a system from a small
prototype to a full production system. It's never a problem to
incrementally add functions.

I like Lisp. Things that require compiler mods in other languages, you
can do with macros in Lisp. The profusion of monadic libs such as Cats,
is great.

import lux from '../../assets/blog/lux-logo.png'

<Image alt='image' src={lux} />

_Jon:_ Any reservations?

_Craig:_ I'm not sure Clojure will be the last language I'll ever use.
[Lux](https://github.com/LuxLang/lux) is exciting me currently; it's a
Haskell in Lisp form that runs on the JVM. It has static type checking
where all the type information is just a data-structure. The macros are
monadic and have access to the full compiler state. It's really quite
beautiful.

We also get a number of dynamic type errors which would be avoidable in
a world of static type checking. The dynamic approaches of
[spec](https://clojure.org/about/spec) and
[schema](https://github.com/plumatic/schema) aren't really going to cut
it; helpful sure, and generative testing support is nice, but there are
still lots of silly errors such as not catching the missing branch of a
case statement when the data model has changed.

On the other hand, it's great with Clojure that code is shared between
front end and back end - this avoids a whole class of bugs around
sharing messages on the wire.

# Hiring?

import cc from '../../assets/blog/clojurians-chat.png'

<Image alt='image' src={cc} />

_Jon:_ How have you found hiring Clojure devs?

_Craig:_ It's just good enough. I've hired mostly through the
[Clojurians slack](https://clojurians.slack.com/messages/clojure-uk), a
little bit through LinkedIn and my network. We haven't had huge numbers
of respondees but we've had good-quality candidates to fit the role. We
avoid recruitment consultants.

_Jon:_ Are you hiring now?

_Craig:_ Currently we've two devs and a UI person. The devs are full
stack which is so far working out really well. I am always on the
lookout for excellent Clojure developers to help me and my dev team keep
up with rising customer demand and make every new version of Yapster the
best yet!

_Jon:_ Full stack is a lot fun.

_Craig:_ Yeah I did some swipe gesture handling in the application - the
instantaneous nature of development and playing with it was great fun.

import yt2 from '../../assets/blog/yapster-team2.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={yt2} />

_Jon:_ How much of your work is local vs remote?

_Craig:_ We are mostly remote, but we do have office days. If people are
interested and intrinsically motivated, then it's good to work from
home, as there can be fewer interruptions.

And of course, we have our own messaging product for communication.

# State of Clojure

_Jon:_ What's your view on the state of Clojure in London?

_Craig:_ Hmm, not sure. It's not sufficiently popular that there's so
much noise, but there is a significant number of significant companies
doing significant things.

_Jon:_ Sounds significant. Any last words?

_Craig:_ I'm maybe a bit jaded with Clojure now, but I wouldn't have
done things any differently.
