---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in London: Social Superstore'
description: 'Social Reselling with Clojure'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPostClojureIn.astro'
publishedDate: '2017-02-17'
heroImage: 'clojure-in-default.jpg'
clojureIn:
  {
    season: 'one',
    industry: 'e-commerce',
    quote: '"Clojure has helped us to focus on delivering business value."'
  }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

# Social Reselling

[Social Superstore](https://socialsuperstore.com) allows people to setup
their own _store_ to review and promote existing products to their
social networks. Entrepreneurs are given a helping hand to resell
without having to worry about managing stock, logistics and advertising.
Celebrities also use it to make product recommendations to their
following. The platform has worked well with fashion bloggers who can
link subscribers to their own store of selected products.

The tech stack is predominantly Clojure based. They have seven Clojure
developers and four developers working on native applications.

[James Henderson](https://github.com/jarohen) - an ever present London
Clojurian and creator of a host of widely used Clojure open source
libraries - grew the current Clojure team from ground up. [Dave
Aitken](https://github.com/actionshrimp) is a developer using Clojure
for the first time commercially having come from a background of C# and
Javascript.

Malcolm Sparks and I paid a visit to their office in Farringdon, London
for a chat.

import sst from '../../assets/blog/social-superstore-team.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sst} />

# Migrating from Angular.js to ClojureScript

_Jon:_ So what's the tech story here?

_James:_ There has always been Clojure and AWS since a consultancy
bootstrapped the MVP. It originally had a Clojure backend and an Angular
front end. About 6 months in we started a ClojureScript prototype and we
decommissioned the Angular app.

_Jon:_ How long did it take you to move from Angular? What was the
motivation?

_James:_ It took about 2-3 months to decommission Angular. The code-base
was getting harder to maintain; features coming in were taking longer to
develop and the results were buggy. We also wanted the benefits of using
ClojureScript; the state management you get with ClojureScript and
React.js - with frameworks such as Om and Reagent. We were also a
Clojure team.

_Jon:_ You were able to go _\'full stack\'_?

_James:_ Yes, all the devs can work on both the front and back end.

_Dave_: One of the benefits is that we can put logic in `cljc` and share
code across layers.

_Jon:_ Looking back, do you think the mature ClojureScript solution is
better than what you had with Angular?

_James:_ Yes, with Angular there was lots of magic involved.
ClojureScript very much suited our team, although the second generation
of the front-end was always going to be better.

# DevOps

import ku from '../../assets/blog/kubernetes.png'

<Image alt='image' src={ku} />

_Jon:_ What is your non-Clojure stack?

_James:_ PostgreSQL, AWS, SQS, Kubernetes, and Docker.

_Jon:_ How do you provision to AWS?

_Dave:_ We use CloudFormation and Chef; they meet in the middle.

_Jon:_ What's your opinion of Kubernetes?

_Dave:_ Kubernetes is great. It was a bit fiddly initially but that's
improved a lot. We get smooth, zero downtime deployment. You can throw
containers at it, and it becomes super-easy to try out a new service.
Upgrading versions of Kubernetes itself has been fine.

_Jon:_ Have you looked at the AWS equvialent of [ECS (Elastic Container
Services)](https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/)?

_Dave:_ ECS, certainly at the time, wasn't as feature rich. Kubernetes
also gives you a bit more cloud portability; you can port your
applications to the Google Container Engine.

# Clojure Stack

_Jon:_ What's in your Clojure application stack?

_James:_ We're fairly vanilla Clojure. We use Ring with a general set of
custom middleware, [Bidi](https://github.com/juxt/bidi) for routing,
[Medley](https://github.com/weavejester/medley) for a whole host of
utility functions, [Nomad](https://github.com/jarohen/nomad) for
configuration. We are using [Bounce](https://github.com/jarohen/bounce)
for lifecycled components.

_Jon:_ Bounce is what you wrote as an alternative to
[Component](https://github.com/stuartsierra/component)? How does it
differ?

_James:_ Minor things - I wouldn't push Bounce heavily as it has _grown_
into our application. I wanted to avoid having a partially started
system in the REPL which is difficult to recover from. I also personally
prefer using vanilla values and functions as opposed to protocols.
[Mount](https://github.com/tolitius/mount) is more similar to Bounce but
I'm not keen on the top-level state; Bounce pulls ideas from both
Component and Mount.

_Jon:_ What else are you using?

_Dave:_ I like [Yesql](https://github.com/krisajenkins/yesql) for SQL
usage; it has a good level of abstraction.

_James:_ We don't have a traditional REST API; we've moved to a
command/query API - taking inspiration from [Bobby Calderwood's talk at
the Conj](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qDNPQo9UmJA). We compose API
requests as Clojure data structures and the front-end requests just the
data it needs as part of _pull_ model. We developed a library for this
but it's currently in house, we stole ideas from
[GraphQL](http://graphql.org/learn/).

# ClojureScript

_Jon:_ Have you used [Om Next](https://github.com/omcljs/om/wiki/)?

_James:_ We tried it on some hack nights but we're very much tied to
[Reagent](https://reagent-project.github.io/) right now.

_Jon:_ How have you found Reagent?

import el from '../../assets/blog/elmlogo.png'

<Image alt='image' src={el} />

_James:_ Generally, it's very good. I would say that there are a few
pitfalls that we've learnt to avoid, for example where you can
potentially close over the wrong variable leading to components
remounting/rerendering too often, or not often enough. To get around
this we've taken some inspiration from Elm; we keep state at the top in
a separate tree and use stateless views with events firing out from
those views.

We have a giant multi-method that works off incoming events, which is a
lot like Elm.

_Dave:_ Elm is strong with types. Without types it can get confusing -
the state tree, the view tree, and events flying about. Having some
lightweight assistance on keeping track of the types is helpful;
ensuring the trees and data types are correlated.

import dv from '../../assets/blog/devcards.png'

<Image alt='image' src={dv} />

_James:_ We've stolen a lot of ideas from Elm.

_Dave:_ We also use Devcards, it's really good for prototyping.

# The Types Debate

_Jon:_ Where do you guys stand on the types debate?

_James:_ Clojure has a lot of benefits of being dynamically typed; it's
second to none for playing with data and prototyping.

A challenge we have is handling data coming from a variety of disparate
sources, where the data quality can be poor. Originally having a dynamic
structure was useful, but now that the system has matured, we could
benefit from more rigorous typing. We've gone for Schema, not so much
Spec because it wasn't around.

_Dave:_ By not having types you're taking on tech debt in a way, which
is good when you're finding your feet. Once code solidifies you've then
got work to add rigour to it.

_James:_ - Our typing is particularly focused on system boundaries - our
APIs and data coming from external sources.

As a hobbyist Haskeller I miss
[ADTs](http://blog.jenkster.com/2016/06/functional-mumbo-jumbo-adts.html)
from Clojure.

_Dave:_ Always the grass is greener.

_James:_ Without a shadow of a doubt.

# Hiring/Training

_Jon:_ How have you found hiring?

_Dave:_ Everyone on the team applied because it was a Clojure job.

_James:_ We haven't had as many people to interview, but we've had a
better hit rate of success. Overall Clojure has been very good.

_Jon:_ How about training?

_James:_ Learning the basics of Clojure is great - it's a really simple
language. In my experience, though, people can find it quite difficult
making the jump from a hobbyist to writing serious Clojure in
production. In OOP, the larger architectural patterns are
well-documented; in FP, it's quite a different mindset.

One thing that helps is watching tech talks as a group and going to
conferences.

# Large Code-bases

_Jon:_ What's the size of your Clojure code-base?

_James:_ About 25K LOC Clojure, 30K ClojureScript.

_Jon:_ Have you learnt any lessons about refactoring on a mature Clojure
code-base?

_James:_ The biggest thing is using schema on the system boundaries. In
terms of refactoring, the REPL is very handy - we have lots of comment
blocks with examples on how to use the code and example data structures.
REPL driven development is a big win for Clojure; we iterate quite fast.

import ki from '../../assets/blog/kibana-basics.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ki} />

_Jon:_ Do you have much automated testing?

_Dave:_ We do have smoke tests that catch quite a lot of things. We also
have a lot of monitoring using Kibana and LogStash.

_James:_ A principal we follow is to reduce magic where possible. When
you make a change you want to be confident about the impact of that
change. Here schemas help us to ensure that impact of changes are well
known and small.

We've also split out IO from non-IO code. Before, lots of code pulled
out data from the DB and munged it etc. Now that we've split it out, the
amount of IO code has become smaller; reducing the surface area for
things to go wrong.

# State of Clojure

_Jon:_ Your view on the state of Clojure?

_James:_ Clojure has been very stable since I came here in January 2015.
We have a good handle on how to architect Clojure code; and for data
transformations it's particularly well suited.

ClojureScript, less so. Having a ClojureScript project a couple of years
old you can now see the _lava layers_; the record of everything that was
best practice at the time. It's still changing quickly.

The decision to go on the JVM has benefited us hugely. The industry has
20-30 years of knowing how to deploy Java applications.

_Dave:_ Things like [New Relic](https://newrelic.com/) working straight
away has been a plus.

import ld from '../../assets/blog/ldnclj.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ld} />

_Jon:_ What do you think the state of Clojure is in London?

_James:_ London seems to be a hub for Clojure. There are lot of
community events: dojos, Clojure Bridge, multiple conferences.

Clojure itself has stablised, now coming up to 10 years old. It's not as
_new_ as in the early days.

# Wrap Up

_Jon:_ Any last words?

_Dave:_ Thank heavens we're not using Java.

_James:_ Clojure has helped us to focus on delivering business value, to
help us get to the core of our business requirements.
