---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in Manchester: Swirrl'
description: 'Crunching with Clojure'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPostClojureIn.astro'publishedDate: '2016-11-04'
heroImage: 'swirrl-logo.jpg'
clojureIn: { season: 'one', industry: 'startups & software', quote: '"Clojure is still perceived as new, but there is nothing we have tried to do and found we could not."' }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

import im from '../../assets/blog/IMG_7358.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={im} />

# Introduction

[Swirrl](http://www.swirrl.com/) is a Manchester based software
development company that provides a Linked Data platform used by
regional and national government organizations to publish their data.

Data is uploaded onto Swirrl's
[PublishMyData](http://www.swirrl.com/publishmydata) platform where it
is stored as [five star open data](http://5stardata.info/en/), a highly
connected format that allows every statistical observation to be linked
and viewed in context. Once data is uploaded, users can browse the
diverse data-sets available to them and create custom views such as
time-series or maps, or they can make use of PublishMyData's extensive
API to extract data, including the ability to submit graph based
[SPARQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SPARQL) queries.

Examples of deployed instances of PublishMyData include the [Department
for Communities and Local Government](http://opendatacommunities.org/)
and [Scottish Government Statistics](http://statistics.gov.scot/).

# Open Source

Swirrl has created [Grafter](https://github.com/Swirrl/grafter), an open
source ETL (Extract-Transform-Load) library for converting large tabular
data-sets (usually supplied as CSV/Excel) into Linked Data whilst also
providing interop with Linked Data systems.

import sw from '../../assets/blog/swirrldemo.png'

<Image alt='image' src={sw} />

Grafter is where the heavy crunching and transformation of data happens
and this is where Clojure was first used in the company. They have also
created a _git for Linked Data\`_\' service called Drafter, where
incoming RDF queries and outgoing RDF triples are parsed and rewritten
so that users can view unpublished _draft data_ ahead of committing and
publishing.

Malcolm Sparks and I travelled to Manchester to meet [Ric
Roberts](https://twitter.com/RicRoberts) and [Rick
Moynihan](https://twitter.com/RickMoynihan). Ric Roberts is the CTO
having founded Swirrl in 2008 with his brother Bill. Rick Moynihan is a
Clojure and functional programming practitioner who founded the
[Manchester Lambda Lounge](http://www.lambdalounge.org.uk/).

# The Beginning

_Jon Pither:_ How did Swirrl get started?

_Ric Roberts:_ My brother Bill and I founded Swirrl in 2008. We started
with a semantic wiki, where every page has structured, linked data. We
got over 10k users but few paying users. From this early experience we
learnt that the _sharing spreadsheets_ idea was the really useful bit;
the openness and sharing of data. We had in essence re-invented RDF from
base principles - the notion of triples etc. Eventually we moved on to
real RDF.

We then got a [S
cottish Enterprise](https://www.scottish-enterprise.com)
grant (Bill was living in Sterling, Scotland), to build a platform to
publish energy usage data of Scottish parliament buildings. This was the
first version of our data publishing platform that we produced in 2012.

import sl from '../../assets/blog/swirrllogo.png'

<Image alt='image' src={sl} />

# Clojure

_Jon Pither:_ How did Swirrl get started with Clojure?

_Ric Roberts:_ We started off with Ruby. Clojure came in when we hired
Rick (Rick Moynihan).

_Rick Moynihan:_ I've been using Clojure since 2008 and have been a bit
selfish in doing so, as I enjoy coding with the language.

I've always had a curiosity about Lisp. As a teenager I read the [GNU
manifesto](https://www.gnu.org/gnu/manifesto.en.html), and I followed
[Richard Stallman](https://stallman.org/) and was intrigued by how
highly he always spoke of Lisp. After getting into Erlang, I then saw
Rich Hickey talk, and it combined all the things I cherished, both
theoretical and practical: Lisp, the JVM, and Functional Programming.
Lisp has always been a hotbed of cool ideas.

Clojure clicked for me and was a big multiplier on my abilities, as an
otherwise average developer. I was soon building solutions to grapple
with bigger problems in fewer lines of code than would have been
possible with Java or Ruby. Clojure is also a good fit for rapidly
prototyping solutions.

import ll from '../../assets/blog/lambdalounge.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ll} />

_Ric Roberts:_ The use case of our problem fits. ETL is inherently
functional - chaining fns together, data in, data out.

_Rick Moynihan:_ The JVM was also an attraction. Drafter and Grafter
both use [Sesame](http://rdf4j.org/) (now RDF4J - Rick Moynihan is a
committer) which coupled with
[Jena](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/sdb/) (we also make use of)
are probably the two most mature libraries in any language for working
with Linked Data.

A strong argument for Clojure is Java interop and the JVM is usually a
safe option for any heavy lifting you need to do.

_Jon Pither:_ How much Clojure do you do now?

_Ric Roberts:_ We've got about 6-7 fulltime developers - of which 50% of
are Clojure devs. We favor Clojure in our new work over Ruby.

_Jon Pither:_ How have you found the on-boarding process?

_Ric Roberts:_ We've had both an intern and a statistician learn Clojure
as well as devs more familiar with JS, Ruby or C#. There's the odd
teething issue around understanding lazy seqs, caching, and memory
usage. We use code-review and pull requests to get through this. The
intern picked Clojure up very quickly and absolutely loved it.

import si from '../../assets/blog/swirrlinterview.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={si} />

_Jon Pither:_ What about hiring?

_Ric Roberts:_ Rick (Moynihan) runs the [Manchester Lambda
Lounge](http://www.lambdalounge.org.uk/) and we've picked a up couple of
developers from there. One was a Haskell dev - Lee - and the other -
Scott - was an experienced developer who was doing Clojure in his spare
time.

What's more important to us is that we look for people who can learn
rather than people who know Clojure.

# Clojure Manchester

_Jon Pither:_ What's the Manchester Clojure scene like?

_Rick Moynihan:_ Clojure does seem quite London centric although there
was a large start-up doing Clojure here recently. In Manchester there's
the Lambda Lounge, some Elm and Haskell. Scala is very popular.

# State of Clojure

_Ric Roberts:_ Clojure is still perceived as new, but there's nothing
we've tried to do and found we couldn't. It feels mature and the Java
interop is a big thing so you can always use Java libs.

_Rick Moynihan:_ Clojure is still great and I've never had any problems
with maturity - even with pre 1.0 Clojure. Even since the early days,
the quality of language and the absence of bugs has been remarkable. The
few bugs I've encountered in that time have always been fixed in the
next release.

The Clojure tools and environments these days are really good too.

# Resources

Check out the [Swirrl blog](http://medium.swirrl.com/).
