---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in London: Gower Street'
description: 'Clojure in the movie business'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPostClojureIn.astro'publishedDate: '2017-12-15'
heroImage: 'gower-street-logo.jpg'
clojureIn: { season: 'one', industry: 'data & analytics' }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

> As we've grown as a business we're now using Clojure for almost
> everything...

## Distributing Movies

import go from '../../assets/blog/gower-st-web.png'

<Image alt='image' src={go} />

[Gower Street Analytics](http://gower.st/) is an analytics company
working in the film industry. Gower Street provides a platform for major
distributors of films to manage release dates, helping them to decide
exactly when a film should be released.

They use complex algorithms built in Clojure to simulate the performance
of box offices around the world, trying out various release dates for
movies. These simulations take into account population demographics,
release dates and the expected performance of other movies.

I chatted with Gower Street co-founder Dimitrios Mitsinikos and his team
to discuss their decision to use Clojure to power their business.

**_Jon: What is the goal of Gower Street?_**

**Dimitrios:** We want to build the analytics platform that we think is
missing in the industry. There are many companies doing film analytics,
but most are only doing _green light_ comparisons; looking at how well a
film will do based on which actors are in it, for example.

We instead look at what films are being released around the same time as
others, alongside the likelihood of a film hitting its estimate based on
a variety of data points. We also monitor the market closely, improving
the accuracy of our predictions as we get closer to a film's release
date.

All the large studios are now using our software, and we are in the
process adding more countries to the platform.

**_Jon: How did Gower Street get started?_**

**Dimitrios:** We have a lot of experience in the movie industry - for
the last 15 years I've worked in analytics at Universal Studios. We
started two years ago, spending a lot of time on research and
development, processing data feeds to track how movies are performing
across the world, and figuring out exactly what platform the industry
might need.

**_Jon: So if a studio wants to put out a film, then they can go to you
to find out when would be the optimum time?_**

**Dimitrios:** Yes, that's right. A studio can go online using our
system and see what the film estimates are for the next 12-18 months.
They can play with scenarios, for example: \"Let's swap Star Wars with
Suicide Squad and see how much more or less each film might make.\"

We create algorithms that accurately model the box office, so customers
can see the impact of choosing different release dates and monitor what
is happening in a very competitive environment. For example our models
show that one film could have made an extra \$2.5m by releasing on the
date that our system suggested.

It's fascinating that even in a mature market like the UK, you can still
significantly increase revenue by using analytics in this way.

import gow from '../../assets/blog/gower-st.png'

<Image alt='image' src={gow} />

## Technology choices

**_Jon: Why did you choose Clojure to power the business?_**

**Dimitrios:** The core of our business is the simulation of the global
box office. It's all about processing complex and constantly changing
data as fast as possible. When we first started our simulations could
take five hours. It's now about a minute. We have found functional
programming a great fit for our team, especially those with a scientific
background.

**Team:** Clojure might seem an unusual choice for performance-intensive
simulation work; but it's working out well. It's a great fit for the
problem, performant enough for our needs and it's extremely expressive
and readable, allowing us to iterate quickly on complex simulation
algorithms.

**_Jon: How do you get it so fast?_**

**Dimitrios:** Through lots of optimization and the ability to easily
deploy using Amazon AWS.

**Team**: We've had to think outside the box, just throwing more
machines at the problem might help, but then we'd have more problems
with managing a distributed processing infrastructure e.g. a Hadoop
cluster. To say more would be to enter a larger discussion of simulation
and stochastic models that we probably don't have time for here!

**_Jon: How did you go about adopting Clojure?_**

**Dimitrios:** Initially we started with Racket. Racket was nice and
functional, but it was lacking support in certain areas. The developers
came up with the idea to move to Clojure.

**Team:** Because the webapp for a previous iteration of our product was
built in Racket, we were no strangers to parentheses. We tried Clojure
for certain parts of the system at first, and it worked out very well.
It has a larger ecosystem than Racket, so we've ended up adopting it
across our stack. The usual reason of _it works well with our existing
Java systems_ wasn't a factor for us.

**Dimitrios:** As we've grown as a business we're now using Clojure for
almost everything - plain Clojure for back-end services and
ClojureScript on the front-end.

**Team:** While we've gotten a lot from Clojure, we're not obsessive,
and recognize that it isn't the best tool for every job. We've been
experimenting with Serverless recently and this is one area where a
lighter-weight solution may work better.

**_Jon: What is your team size?_**

**Dimitrios:** Our development team is currently five people and will be
six shortly. We're a fully remote team, scattered across the UK.

**Team:** You might think that remote would be an issue, but we've
developed a way of collaboratively working together using
[appear.in](https://appear.in) video conferencing, Slack and tmux - we
pair-program remotely much of the time and although we're close to XP
we'd prefer to refer to our team as agile with a small _a_.

We get together for two days a month on-site in London as a team to
work, eat and play - it helps us see each other as people rather than
just co-workers. We have a flat-hierarchy and use a consensus-based
decision-making model, so we're not exactly your normal corporate
sweatshop in this regard; we very much agree with Dan Pink's ideas about
[Autonomy, Mastery and
Purpose](https://www.amazon.com/Drive-Surprising-Truth-About-Motivates/dp/1594484805/?tag=braipick-20).

## Hiring

**_Jon: Tell me about hiring?_**

**Dimitrios:** The team has grown organically, and based on word of
mouth we've hired people. From my experience, it's best for the
development team to grow slowly, there's a risk with teams of growing
big too quickly.

**Team:** We're actively creating an environment which promotes employee
well-being and we take intentional steps to reduce inherent bias and to
promote diversity. We focus on people and robust discussions rather than
processes or tools.

We don't require people to know Clojure to join us; just to have
valuable experience to contribute and a willingness to learn and be open
to new things. We've found that Clojure is a big draw for us - it
attracts the kind of people who are more likely to see things as a
holistic system rather than a collection of classes.
