---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in Ireland: Aviso Novate'
description: 'A Clojure heavyweight'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPostClojureIn.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-09-22'
heroImage: 'aviso-logo.jpg'
clojureIn:
  {
    season: 'one',
    industry: 'finance',
    quote: '"When a developer learns Clojure, they never really want to go back."'
  }
---

# A Clojure Power User

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'
import aviso from '../../assets/blog/aviso.png'

<Image alt='image' src={aviso} />

[Aviso Novate](https://github.com/AvisoNovate) started using Clojure in
the summer of 2010 and have been ramping up ever since, having now one
of the world's largest Clojure codebases that clocks in at over 150K
lines of code (Clojure and ClojureScript). They are based in
[Killorglin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Killorglin) - a beautiful
part of Ireland - where they use a combination of on-site and remote
developers.

Aviso has got a really strong team and has contributed widely to the
Clojure ecosystem, including substantial contributions to ClojureScript
(by [Micha≈Ç Marczyk](https://github.com/michalmarczyk)) and a production
of [various libraries](https://github.com/AvisoNovate).

I caught up with CTO Paudi Moriatry to discuss Aviso's Clojure journey.

# Clojure, Getting Started

_Jon Pither:_ How did you get started with Clojure?

_Paudi Moriarty:_ We had a lot of in-house Java expertise and we wanted
to carry on using the JVM platform and our Java libraries. Performance
of the JVM is also very good, and it's robust in terms of memory
management, therefore we knew we wanted to stay on the JVM. This would
also allow us to continue offering our clients Java based applications.

We were originally using the Tapestry 5 framework and at some stage the
author [Howard Lewis Ship](http://howardlewisship.com/) introduced us to
Clojure.

_JP:_ What was it about Clojure you found attractive?

_PM:_ Once you see what you can do with a Lisp on the JVM there's no
going back. We found that with Java there's a lot of incidental
complexity, where developers start off designing class hierarchies and
how data should be stored, debating which fields should be private vs
public etc. Should methods be static or not? It's all very complicated
and adds an overhead. Then there's the issue of a lack of immutability
in a multi-threaded environment which can be a real problem.

Clojure brings simplicity and flexibility where we can simply focus on
the functions processing data. A lot of what we do is low-level parsing
of a variety of different data formats and data transformations, and
Clojure is extremely effective for this.

import paudi from '../../assets/blog/paudi.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={paudi} />

_JP:_ How was the early part of the journey?

_PM:_ There were some initial challenges as developers had to leave
known patterns, libraries and frameworks behind to learn new ones. We
were early adopters of Clojure, and we had early code that changed
substantially when additions to the language arrived such as protocols.
We had also established our own state management approach, which was
cleaned up when the Component framework came along. Components and
protocols also improved the modularity of our code-base.

Performance was also an initial issue. We were building a system that
needed to match the benchmarks of a high performance C based
counterpart. We had made extensive use of Clojure's sequence library for
nearly everything, but in order to get the performance we needed we had
to use byte-buffers in certain places and to use Netty as a completely
async platform. We've learnt a lot, and now our Clojure application is
faster than the C competition.

_JP:_ Any other technologies you'd like to mention?

_PM:_ We worked with [Matthias Nehlsen](http://matthiasnehlsen.com/) and
incorporated his [Systems
Toolbox](https://github.com/matthiasn/systems-toolbox) as the basis for
our Web interface. There's a [blog about
it](http://matthiasnehlsen.com/blog/2015/04/09/Where-Are-The-Updates/).

We've also worked with [Ryan Neufeld](http://www.rkn.io/) on adding
simulation testing using [Simulant](https://github.com/Datomic/simulant)
to our setup for multiple applications. See Ryan's [_Simulant in Anger_
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RHf8ngqVKys).

# Hiring

_JP:_ How have you found hiring of Clojure devs?

_PM:_ It was very difficult for us to find the right calibre of Java
developer beforehand. When we moved to Clojure we found that we were
attracting a different kind of developer, and it was almost difficult to
talk to a developer that wasn't suitable. We started out by reaching out
to various Clojure mailing lists, but after a while we found that top
rate developers were starting to find us! People had seen that we were
writing Clojure in production and they wanted to know more.

With Clojure we're getting the creme of developers who have migrated
their way through Java and Scala, and have emerged on the other side.

_JP:_ What's your experience of developers making the jump to Clojure on
your watch?

_PM:_ When a developer learns Clojure, they never really want to go
back. It becomes a _go-to_ tool for getting things done, and no one
wants to move off using Clojure. We've had developers come in and want
to try out various languages such as OCaml, Scala and Haskell, but
Clojure seems to stick.

We've had an interesting journey where one developer really liked
Angular.js, but disliked JavaScript. So he built a web-app that used
Angular, but that was primarily composed in ClojureScript. We're
probably the only company in the world to have done that!

# Clojure in Ireland and the UK

_JP:_ What you think the state of Clojure is in Ireland and the UK

_PM:_ Clojure is no longer in the sidelines. There are high profile
case-studies of Clojure being used in the banks in the cities. We know
that Clojure is being at Walmart in the US in a massive way, it's
definitely on the up.

I wouldn't say that Clojure is having a massive explosion, but it's
growing steadily.

import clojure from '../../assets/blog/103-clojure-spec-with-rich-hickey.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={clojure} />

# State of Clojure

_JP:_ Last question, what do you think the state of Clojure is, anything
that excites you?

[spec](http://clojure.org/about/spec) excites us. We've had an issue
where there's been lots of maps of data in our code-base and it can be
difficult to understand the shape of the data. We've used Schema, but
Spec seems to get the balance right, decoupling the validation of data
and describing it, and looks like really elegant solution.

Generally with Clojure we value a slow evolution. The core is stable and
the scope is contained; it's the opposite of Scala where a lot gets
thrown in.
