---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Clojure in London: Signal Media'
description: 'Obtaining knowledge with Clojure'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPostClojureIn.astro'publishedDate: '2017-02-03'
heroImage: 'signal-ai-logo.jpg'
clojureIn: { season: 'one', industry: 'startups & software', quote: '"Clojure is a pragmatic, real language, designed to be run in production"' }
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

# Generating Understanding

import si from '../../assets/blog/signal-team.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={si} />

[Signal
Media](http://signalmedia.co/?utm_source=Referral&utm_campaign=Clojure_JUXT_blog&utm_medium=Backlink)
is a machine learning company that extracts knowledge from unstructured
textual content. The company currently processes between 2-3 million
documents a day from different sources such as newspapers, magazines,
broadcasts, and online publications.

Each piece of content needs to be understood: what it is about? Who is
being mentioned? Is it _apple_ the fruit or Apple the company? Is it the
Trump company being mentioned or the Donald Trump presidency? To face up
against these challenges Signal uses techniques such as natural language
processing and machine learning.

To learn more about this company and their use of Clojure, Malcolm
Sparks and I ventured to their London offices to meet co-founder and
head of research Dr Miguel Martinez, second employee and software
engineer Tom Savage, and VP of engineering Luca Grulla.

import sf from '../../assets/blog/signal-founders.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sf} />

# Background

_Jon:_ So when and how did Signal get started?

_Miguel:_ We founded Signal over 4 years ago in a garage with the three
of us (Wesley Hall, David Benigson and Miguel Martinez). Wes and I
connected on Meetup.com, and then I ended up doing the last year of my
PhD and a start-up at the same time. I experienced sleep deprivation for
a year, but the gamble has paid off.

_Jon:_ A garage? Sounds old school?

_Miguel:_ Yes, at one stage we had 8-12 people in the garage with 14
whiteboards and lots of coffee.

The first goal was to provide meaningful information for executives. We
first built an MVP/prototype in Java and it progressed quickly, going
from processing 300K documents to 1 million. We then closed our first
client and went to seek investment, hitting every VC in London.

Now we have over 50 people, with half being developers.

_Jon:_ Could you describe what the technology does?

_Miguel:_ We have a data processing pipeline for incoming documents that
has to be lightening quick due to the volume.

The pipeline consists of a series of components, each adding their own
complexity. For example we perform spam detection (filtering), language
detection and translation (publications in 40 different languages from
90 different countries), and we have components for anomaly detection
and sentiment analysis. Some of the components are at the research
stage.

At the end of the pipeline we put all this data into different databases
such as [Elasticsearch](https://www.elastic.co/). Then we can ask
questions such as _give me all the articles (and tweets) about Clojure_.

A venture capitalist can track companies and areas that they want to get
into (i.e. AI, big data). Law firms can track clients and legislation to
discover how they match up against financial and corporate
responsibility commitments.

import sg from '../../assets/blog/signal-generic.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sg} />

# Clojure Journey

_Jon:_ How did you decide to use Clojure?

_Miguel:_ We started using Groovy to define how the components worked
together.

_Tom:_ Groovy was the _glue_.

_Miguel:_ But it was clunky. I was not a fan of Groovy as a language -
it was difficult to track state and it was complicated. The few bits we
liked were the functional bits.

We started thinking about other options. Wes went to a conference and
saw [Ben
Evans](https://skillsmatter.com/legacy_profile/ben-evans#skillscasts),
he asked Ben which language would win out and Ben recommended Clojure.
This was around 2014 at a time when it seemed lots of good devs were
trying it out ahead of the companies.

Wes tried it out for 2-4 weeks and then showed us. Then I took it for 2
weeks. After this two weeks we decided to change the entire codebase to
Clojure. We put in a queue system between components, so that we could
focus on one component at a time. We got a gigantic code reduction and
the speed was actually faster.

_Jon:_ What did you see as the advantage of Clojure?

_Tom:_ Our _research functions_ are essentially data transformation. The
kinds of functions we write are pure functions, so Clojure lends itself
very well to this.

_Miguel:_ Clojure was way better for machine learning than Java, with
independent functions that cater well for parallelism, simply taking
data in and returning data out. Also, it was very important to us that
Clojure is a pragmatic, real language designed to run in production.

_Tom:_ The business domain is about transforming data, a great fit for
functional programming. When you have high level functions - being able
to pass functions as arguments - a lot of complexity in standard Object
Oriented design patterns just falls away.

Also, we needed to push for predictability. We don't like
non-deterministic models; pure functions and immutability fit.

_Miguel:_ Replicability and reproducibility are very important. Testing
is critical around our models to ensure we don't have differences and
side effects.

import sl from '../../assets/blog/signal-logo.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sl} />

# JVM and Library Support

_Jon:_ Any challenges moving to Clojure?

_Miguel:_ We spent a significant amount of time migrating our Java
components to Clojure, but we realized that even though we love the
language, the coverage and support for libraries is far from perfect.

_Malcolm:_ The JVM has a weakness in your domain?

_Miguel:_ In my opinion the JVM has a smaller number of libraries for
machine learning than compared to Python. Each language has it's pros
and cons. Python is generally slower and more verbose, not close to
Clojure in terms of being idiomatic about being functional programming.

_Luca:_ Python has a lot of traction in academia, in research. This has
naturally produced an ecosystem in applied research such as textual
analytics, natural language processing and AI.

import scl from '../../assets/blog/scikitlearn.png'

<Image alt='image' src={scl} />

_Miguel:_ One major example - [Scikit-learn](http://scikit-learn.org/)
is the major machine learning toolset in Python. It has a huge community
of supporters; the committers are both developers and researchers. There
are extremely well documented examples of how to use the library. The
JVM has libraries but many are experimental and less well supported.

We've contributed to some JVM libraries around machine learning, but you
need hundreds of people involved to make a success of it.

_Malcolm:_ So Python and Clojure?

_Luca:_ We are moving to an architecture where Clojure is the data
processing pipeline backbone. Then we have services in Python or
Clojure.

_Miguel:_ We are polygot now, the researchers and developers know both
Clojure and Python.

_Jon:_ Any other frustrations?

_Tom_: Error messages trip people up; common mistakes people make such
as mistyping a variable can lead to large stacktraces. Also starting the
REPL takes a while compared to other languages (i.e. Haskell).

import cl from '../../assets/blog/4clojure.png'

<Image alt='image' src={cl} />

# Training and Hiring

_Jon:_ How have you gone about training?

_Miguel_: We learnt with [4Clojure](https://www.4clojure.com/) and we
started doing exercises not stop. Our first pieces of code were not
idiomatic but we got used to it, struggled and persevered. If you follow
the top devs on 4Clojure, they can do in a line and a half what we could
do in 6 lines.

We then used 4clojure as a filter for incoming CVs - as a recruitment
tool. We then check the profiles of candidates and test how quickly they
can pick it up.

We believe every data scientist is a developer - every one of our
researchers will pass a 4Clojure test (for example do 20 exercises in 4
days). Everyone from the research side has enjoyed learning a new
language, Clojure is easy to learn.

_Jon:_ How have you found hiring for Clojure developers?

_Miguel_: If someone is interested in Clojure, chances are they are a
good developer because it's not mainstream.

_Tom_: If you're looking for people that know Clojure then it's obvious
where to look, but its a small pool. If you look for people that can
learn Clojure then it's a much wider pool.

_Luca_: We get people very interested to learn Clojure. There's
definitely a growing appetite of people wanting to learn. They've heard
enough about Clojure and are ready to make the jump. They want the joy
and beauty of it and are looking for an opportunity.

_Tom_: I did Haskell at Uni so I was interested. Signal were looking for
FP experts and found me.

# IDE

_Jon:_ What IDEs do you use here?

_Miguel_: We started using [Light Table](http://lighttable.com/) in the
garage. Then we went to Sublime and from there to Emacs.

_Luca_: We have a current split between Emacs and Vim.

_Miguel_: When we work with python we use
[PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/) or Sublime. We also use
[Jupyter Notebooks](http://jupyter.org/) extensively for prototyping.

# Technologies

_Jon:_ What technologies would you like to give a shout-out to?

_Tom:_ We use Reagent/Reframe with ClojureScript. Reagent is really nice
to work with.

_Miguel:_ I'd like to mention [ClojureWerkz](http://clojurewerkz.org/);
their libraries have really helped us a lot. It was good to see people
developing libraries actively with good documentation.

# State of Clojure?

_Tom_: Adoption is increasing. The main issue is that the people who
have discovered it were already in a sense looking for it.

_Miguel:_ Python and Java are known in the universities whereas Clojure
is still relatively obscure. Advertising Clojure at the universities
might give it an extra push.
