---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Announcing a unique event: XT16'
description: 'A curated conference for the curious'
category: 'clojure'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '10 May 2016'
heroImage: 'unique-event.jpg'
---

It's 2016 and this 6th October, JUXT are hosting **XT16**. Since 16 is
such an important and nostalgic number for us programmers we felt it
would be a shame not to mark it in some way. So we're bringing together
some of the people that have inspired us over the years.

[XT16](https://juxt.pro/XT16.html) is a one-day curated conference. Set
in the UK countryside just north of London --- in a secure automotive
testing facility --- we will be exploring technologies that push the
boundary.

JUXT is a firm that specialises in Clojure, but this is not a conference
solely for enthusiasts of the language. Where Clojure will feature, it
will be live-coding demonstrating the art of the possible and the
beautiful.

We've got an amazing line up of speakers, and have knitted together an
electic series of playful sessions, technical talks and
thought-provoking discussions examining the bigger questions impacting
our society through technology. From futurologist and Radio 4
broadcaster Professor **James Woudhuysen**, **Portia Tung**, **Karsten
Schmidt**, **Sam Aaron**, ThoughtWorks' **James Lewis**, **Tommy
Hall**, **Kris Jenkins** and more, we're sure you'll be challenged and
entertained.

Of course, the quality of the speakers will be matched by the quality of
the venue, gourmet food, speciality coffee (from our local artisan
coffee shop) and bespoke craft beer (from the excellent XT brewery based
near the venue).

Numbers are limited to just 128 tickets, which we expect to sell fast.
Get yours at https://juxt.pro/XT16.html.
