---
title: 'JUXT Raffle (held at ClojureConj 2023): Terms and Conditions'
layout: '../layouts/PolicyTerms.astro'
---

# **JUXT Raffle (held at ClojureConj 2023): Terms and Conditions**

This Raffle is held and managed by JUXT Ltd (“JUXT”). JUXT Ltd is a registered company incorporated in England and Wales with company number 08457399 and its registered office at Norfolk House - Studio 1, Ground Floor, Silbury Blvd, Milton Keynes, MK9 2AH, United Kingdom.

These terms and conditions are for a one-time Raffle to be held by JUXT at ClojureConj 2023, on April 27-28, 2023 in Durham NC, USA. Raffle entry is free of charge, and made online via a dedicated raffle Google form provided by JUXT at the JUXT sponsor table at ClojureConj 2023. The winner will stand to win a new Dell Alienware 34-inch curved QD-OLED gaming monitor\*, which will be shipped to him/her/them after the conference. The monitor mentioned above is the only prize drawn at this raffle.

## **Raffle Rules**

Thank you for entering our raffle, which is subject to the following rules:

1. By answering and submitting the raffle Google form provided by JUXT and made accessible by a JUXT-authorised tablet at the JUXT sponsor table at ClojureConj 2023, you agree to be entered into a free prize draw to win a new Dell Alienware 34-inch curved QD-OLED gaming monitor.

   _\*subject to availability, for more information please refer to paragraph 14 of the Raffle Rules._

2. There is no cost to enter the raffle. Each person can enter the raffle form as many times as they like, but we will consider only unique email addresses in the raffle’s single and final winner draw.

3. You can enter the raffle at the JUXT sponsor table at ClojureConj 2023 - via a dedicated raffle Google form made accessible by a JUXT-authorised tablet. The table will begin operation in the Event Expo Hall on Thursday April 27, 2023 at 8:30 am. Last entry will be on April 28, 2023 at 6:30 pm. All times are in Durham, NC local time at the dates of the ClojureConj 2023 conference.

4. The JUXT Raffle is open for people aged 18 years and over and who are official ticket holders and/or delegates of ClojureConj 2023. JUXT reserves the right to carry out age verification checks as well as conference-badge checks.

5. If a raffle entry is allowed unknowingly to, on behalf of, or for a person under the age of 18 or to anyone not a part of the conference, he/she/they will be exempt from the raffle and will forfeit his/her/their prize.

6. We will not be able to accept raffle entries from people currently residing in countries blacklisted or subject to sanctions by the United States and / or the United Kingdom.

7. JUXT employees, contractors, freelancers, their families, agents or any third party directly associated with the administration of the raffle are not eligible to enter the raffle.

8. The raffle is limited to only accept online entries via the raffle Google form that are collected onsite via a JUXT-authorised tablet at the JUXT sponsor table at ClojureConj 2023. Any other form of entry is not allowed and will not be considered at the draw. Also, any other entity other than JUXT, individual or company or other, is not allowed and has not been permitted to collect raffle information and user details on behalf of JUXT.

9. JUXT will run one, single and final raffle draw - for one single winner - at the end of the ClojureConj 2023 conference, on Friday, April 28, 2023 at 8:00 pm Durham NC, USA local time. The winner will be announced on JUXT social media accounts and will also be notified by email - which will be sent to the email address he/she/they provided when entering the raffle. Email notification of winning will be sent within 5 (five) business days of the draw, not including the day of the draw. JUXT will aim to ensure a speedy delivery of the prize, but cannot guarantee a delivery timeframe, as the prize will be provided by the monitor reseller in the winner's geographic location.

10. The winner will be chosen at random from all successfully completed and submitted forms. At the draw, JUXT will randomly pull 3 emails out of the list of entries: the first email drawn is the winner, second email drawn is the first runner-up, and the third email drawn will be the second runner-up. In the case where the winner has not reached out, or has given corrupt, incorrect, and/ or incomplete information, or is ineligible to win, the prize will move to the first runner-up 30 days after the initial contact attempt date with the winner. If the first runner-up has also given incorrect information or neglected to connect with JUXT or is ineligible to win, the prize will then move on to the second runner-up 30 days after the initial contact attempt date with the first runner-up. If the second runner-up has also given incorrect information or neglected to connect with JUXT or is ineligible to win, JUXT will donate the prize, or a cash-equivalent, to a charity of our choice 30 days after the initial contact attempt date with the second runner-up.

11. JUXT employees cannot accept any form of payment or equivalent benefits for raffle entries.
12. JUXT accepts no responsibility for raffle entries which are lost, incorrect, illegible, or from which the prize winner cannot be identified, or for any technical failure or event which may cause the competition to be disrupted or corrupted.
13. A random number generator by Google is used to select raffle prize winners.
14. The raffle prize is a new Dell Alienware 34-inch curved QD-OLED gaming monitor. In the occurrence where this monitor is no longer available for any reason, not being sold, new models are not being manufactured, or unavailable for purchase and/or delivery at the winner’s geographic location, JUXT will (at its sole discretion) award the winner a similar monitor of similar monetary value.
15. The result of the raffle draw is final.
16. All winners are required to cooperate with JUXT’s right to publish their win as and where deemed appropriate, and to provide proof of age and a valid conference ticket if and when requested.
17. Failure to comply with any of these rules may result in the disqualification of the entry. JUXT reserves the right to disqualify any entry at their absolute discretion.

18. JUXT reserves the right to cancel, void, suspend, or amend this raffle if and when it becomes necessary to do so.

19. JUXT reserves the right to refuse to award the prize to anyone in breach of these terms and conditions.
20. This raffle is subject to the laws of England and Wales.

21. JUXT is committed to respecting your privacy and will use your personal information for the purposes of administering this raffle, promoting its services and products, or where we have a legal basis to do so in accordance with the GDPR and our [Privacy Policy](/privacy-policy). Participant’s information, as it was entered in the raffle Google form will not be shared with any third party, and is subject to JUXT’s [Privacy Policy](/privacy-policy).
22. JUXT’s decision in all matters relating to the raffle is final.
